MHILULOC AS SCL VELS CLILLICL. 
a percentage But even as 


RO Stas a os ae ee 


eneral «f tha TCCR_ has secret any 






id in. : ‘of GDP ex- ment tries to pul 
at “th “not honcht the argument ceed the 4.2% 2% figure for India. episode, blamins 
ries iB o—Shavvenend more ..than oversight, the ali 
ansfe! yo "ules 


regi . ad Fumdamentabe E 
oy = ie SE Had Aivilagy 
Or 


fake: 
Zirla aan. In ¢ a looser, more 
yhysical sense, it’s been Birla Park, 
2 sprawling estate off Gurusaday 
in south Kolkata. Inside, lie the 





FUNDAMENTALS OF 
HINDU. ASTROLOGY 





KANNAN PUBLICATIONS | © 
2, South Bank First Street 
MADRAS-28 


Te 


FUNDAMENTALS OF 
HINDU ASTROLOGY 


BY 
S. KANNAN 


KANNAN PUBLICATIONS 
2s South Bank First Street 


MADRAS-28 


March 1967 


DATASNTIRED 
. 


ee VA 


All Rights Reserved © S. Kannan 


Pa Fi 4 t < .. € , . * 
mE KAEA! Sie ge 


oS 


Rare Book Coiieciic:: 





_ Printed at oes nee 
Tae JuprTer Press PrivATE LtTD., Mapras-18 





PREFACE 


That Astrology is a fascinating and useful subject is an 
acknowledged fact. It is ‘the science of life’s reactions to 
planetary vibrations’. If one moves with the current he will 
not experience any trouble. As Astrology deals with the natural 
- Jaws of life, a knowledge of this science is of absolute necessity 
to everyone to wade through the ocean of life. Fore-warned 
is fore-armed. Hence, the author has attempted in this book 
to deal with this vast subject in a concise and clear manner, 
50 as to enable a layman to have an easy grasp of the subject 
and use it in the daily life. 


This book deals with the-entire subject of Genethliacal 
Astrology in an easy manner in three parts, namely, The general 
influences of planets, signs, etc. : . Predictions from‘ ‘the twelve 
houses ; and Timing of .events including Horary Astrology. By 
a study of these chapters one will have the necessary knowledge 
to arrive at results by examining a horoscope. It is hoped that 
this book will pave the way for a further study of other original 
and advanced works for enlightenment. 


THE AUTHOR 





CHAPTER 


I. 


ee 


VIl. 


VIII. 


IX. 


XI. 
XII. 


XIil. 
Be 
XIV. 


XV, 


CONTENTS 


PART FIRST 


GENERAL INFLUENCES 


Planets, Signs, etc. 

Nature and Qualities of Signs 
Dignities and Qualities of Planets .. 
Accidental Dignities 

Essential Dignities 


Six Sources of Strength’ of Planets 
(Shad-Balas) 


Erection of a Birth Chart 
Divisions of Signs 


The Mundane Houses of the Heavens 
or Bhavas 


Things Governed by Planets 

Rising Signs and Their Influences . 
Effects of the Sun in Each Sign 
Effects of the Moon in Each Sign . . 


Effects of Certain Planetary Combinations 


Principles of Western System of Astrology ., 


PAGE 


15 
17 


21 
25 
31 


35 
38 
40 
44 
47 
51 
54 


CHAPTER 
XVI. 
XVII. 
XVIII. 
XIX. 
XX. 
XXI. 


XXII.: 


XXIII. 


XXIV. 


XXV. 
XXVI. 
XXVII. 
XXVIII 
XXIX. 


XXX. 
XXXII. 
XXXII. 
XXXII. 
XXXIV. 


PART SECOND 


PREDICTIONS 


How to Make Predictions 
First House 

Second House 

Third House 


Fourth House 


- Fifth House 5, 


Sixth House 
Seventh House 
Eighth House 


- Ninth House 


Tenth House 

Eleventh House 

Twelfth House 

An Illustrative Horoscope 
PART THIRD 

TIMING OF EVENTS 

Udu Dhasa-bhukti Calculations 

Gochara or Planetary Transits 

Ashtagavarga Calculations 

Horary Astrology 

Glossary 


PAGE 
58 
62 
67 
71 
75 
19 
82 
85 
91 
96 
99 

103 
105 
106 


109 
117 
119 
130 


134 


PART FIRST 
GENERAL INFLUENCES 


CHAPTER I 


PLANETS, SIGNS ETC. 


There are nine principal planets which influence the Earth. 
They are as follows: 


The Sun (Ravi or Surya) 

The Moon (Chandra) 

Mars (Kuja) 

Mercury (Budha) 

Jupiter (Guru or Brahaspathi) 
Venus ~ (Sukra) 

Saturn (Sani) 

Ascending Node (Rahu) 


Descending Node (Kethu) 


The last two are rather shadows than planets. They are also © 
called the Dragons and they traverse the Zodiac in a reverse 
motion while the other planets travel in a forward motion. The 
Brihat Jataka of Varahamihira does not make mention of these 
two planets at all. But in this book the influence of these two 
planets is also considered. 


The whole Zodiac is divided into twelve signs or rasis which 
form a belt in the heavens of 30 degrees each or 360 degrees 
in all. Why the ancients divided the zodiac into 360 degrees 
appears to be “that the solar year measures 365 days and the 


2 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


lunar year 355, the mean of which is 360, the number of the 
degrees in the zodiac.” The twelve signs are in the following 
order : 


Aries (Mesha) Libra (Thula) 
Taurus (Vrishaba) Scorpio (Vrischika ) 
Gemini (Mithuna) Sagittarius (Dhanus) 
Cancer (Kataka) ~ Capricorn (Makara) 
Leo (Simha) Aquarius (Kumbha) 
Virgo (Kanni) Pisces (Meena) 


Apart from the above-mentioned nine planets and twelve 
signs, there are twenty-seven constellations of fixed stars, which 
also influence us. They are as follows: © 


1. Aswini 10. Magha 19. Mula 

2. Bharani 11. Puryapalguni 20. Purvashada 

3. Krithika 12. Uttarapalguni 21. Uttarashada 

4. Rohini 13. Hastha 22. Sravana 

5. Mrigasirisha 14. Chitra 23. Sravishta 

6. Arudhra 15. Swati 24. Sathabisha 

7, Punarvasya 16. Visaka 25. Purvabadrapada 
8. Pushya 17. Anuradha 26. Uttarabadrapada 
9. Aslesha 18. Jyeshta 27. Revati 


These twenty-seven asterisms also occupy the zodiac which 
is divided into twelve signs or rasis. Hence each sign commenc- 
ing from Aries (Mesha) is comprised of 24 stars beginning from 
Aswini as follows : 


Zodiacal signs. Names of asterisms 
Mesha Aswini, Bharani, Krithika + 
Vrishaba Krithika #, Rohini, Mrigasirisha 4 
Mithuna Mrigasirisha 4, Arudhra, Punarvasya # 
Kataka Punarvasya 4, Pushya, Aslesha 
Simha Magha, Purvapalguni, Uttarapalguni + 
Kanni Uttarapalguni #, Hastha, Chitrai 4 


Thula Chitrai 4, Swati, Visaka 2 


-- Zodiacal signs 


Vrischika 
Dhanus 
Makara 
Kumbha 
Meena 


PLANETS, SIGNS ETC. — - 3 
Names of asterisms 


Visaka 4, Anuradha, Jyeshta 

Moola, Purvashada, Uttarashada + 
Uttarashada #, Sravana, Sravishta + 
Sravishta 4, Sathabisha, Purvabadrapada 4 
Purvabadrapada 4, Uttarabadrapada, Revati 


The whole zodiac is represented in a diagram as follows :— 





12 
Meena 


N. E. 


11 
Kumbha 


Dhanus 


N. W. 








1 2 3 
Mesha Vrishaba Mithuna 
EAST EAST _ S. E. 

4 
Kataka 
SOUTH 

| 5 
| Simha 
| SOUTH 

8 7 6 

Vrischika Tula Kanni 
WEST WEST S. W. 


On account of the rotation of the Earth on its own axis 
it would appear that the Sun traverses the whole zodiac daily. 
At the time of sun-rise the sign occupied by him will rise in the 


4 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


East, then the next sign will be in the East and so on. The 
duration of each sign is as follows :— 








a 3 
Signs g 2 6 5 Signs g g g 3 
AS az as a: 

Ghatikas Ghatikas' Ghatikas Ghatikas' 
Mesha 44 4-28 Thula 5 5-16 
Vrishaba 4} 5-3 Vrischika 54 5 5-29. 
Mithuna 54 5-28 Dhanus 54 5-20 
Kataka 54 5-23 Makara 54 4-45 
Simha 54 5-8 Kumbha 43 4-16 
Kanni 5 5-4 Meena 44 4-10 





The sign in the east is called the rising sign and it has to be 
borne in mind in this connection tliat the sign in which the Sun 
is staying will rise each dayat first along with him. For example, 
on the first day of the month of Mithuna (third month) the Sun 
will be in Mithuna and the Mithuna sign will rise at first along 
with him. After 54 ghatikas, Kataka will begin to rise and after 
54 ghatikas Simha, and so on. This is useful in finding out the 
rising sign (Lagna) of the person at the time of his birth. 


The sign which rises in the east is called Lagna and as all 
the twelve signs will rise in the east owing to the movement of 
the Earth there will be twelve lagnas each day. Lagna in 
Genethliacal astrology is ordinarily led to mean the Rising Sign 
at the time of birth of a native. This lagna is styled also as the 
Ascendant or the Rising Sign. 


The distinction between a lagna and a rasi is that the former 
is the rising sign of a day, while the latter is the sign occupied 
by a planet in the zodiac in the course of its own motion. For 
astrological purposes the word ‘Lagna’ means the Rising Sign 
at the time of birth and ‘ Rasi’ means the sign occupied by the 
Moon at the time of birth. 


PLANETS, SIGNS ETC. 5 


The Hindu calendar months are named after the signs ; and 
each year is purported to begin when the Sun enters the first 
point of Aries (Mesha). He will be moving in Aries for one 
month at the rate of about one degree each day. Then the second 
month will commence when he enters the first degree of Vrishaba. 
Hence one can find out from the position of the Sun in the 
Birth Chart in what month an individual is born. 


Just like twelve signs (rasis) and lagnas, there are twelve 
Houses (bhavas) which are frequently referred to in Astrology. 
Each house represents a department of life of an individual ; 
and for astrological purposes the whole canopy of heavens is 
divided into twelve equal parts covering all the events of life. 
There are no separate names for these houses but are simply 
called First House, Second House and so on. The First House 
starts from the Ascendant in contradistinction to the First sign, 
which starts from Mesha. What events are governed by these 
houses are discussed in a subsequent-chapter and a student need 
not bother about this aspect at this stage. 


In Astrology, there arethree’ important factors which are 
principally considered for arriving at a result, viz., the planets, 
the signs and the houses. The planets are the messengers of 
God and their messages are interpreted from the quality of the 
Sign and House occupied by them at the time of birth, besides 
their own characteristics. Hence, a study of these items is essen- 
tial in astrology and they have been explained in the subsequent 
’ chapters. 


iss 


10. 
Le: 
b2. 


13. 


15. 


16. 


CHAPTER II 


NATURE AND QUALITIES OF SIGNS 


The student should remember well the following, since pre- 
dictions are based principally on the qualities of the signs, etc. 


Masculine signs, Odd 
signs or Fortunate 
signs 

Feminine signs, Even 
signs or Unfortu- 
nate signs 


. Fiery signs 


Earthy signs 
Airy signs 
Watery signs 


Movable, Cardinal or 
Mineral signs 


Fixed or Vegetable 
signs 


. Common or Animal 


signs 


Fruitul signs 

Barren signs 

Double-bodied or Bi- 
Corporal signs 

Equinoctial signs 

Tropical signs 

Northern signs 


Southern signs 


“rp IAL eae MLAs eM BIRT ea sR ECE 


Mesha, Mithuna, Simha, Thula, 
Dhanus and Kumbha 


Vrishaba, Kataka, Kanni, 
Vrischika, Makara and Meena 


Mesha, Simha and Dhanus 
(Mesha and its trines) 
Vrishaba, Kanni and Makara 
(Vrishaba and its trines) 
Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha 
(Mithuna and its trines) 
Kataka, Vrischika and Meena 
(Kataka and its trines) 
Mesha, Kataka, Thula and 
Makara 
(Mesha and its quadrants) 
Vrishaba, Simha, Vrischika and 
Kumbha 
(Vrishaba and its quadrants) 
Mithuna, Kanni, Dhanus and 
Meena 
(Mithuna and its quadrants) 
Kataka, Vrischika and Meena 
Mithuna, Simha and Kanni 
Mithuna, Meena and the first 
half of Dhanus 
Mesha and Thula 
Kataka and Makara 
Mesha, Vrishaba, Mithuna, 
Kataka, Simha and Kanni 
Thula, Vrischika, Dhanus, 
Makara, Kumbha and Meena 


NATURE AND QUALITIES OF SIGNS 7 





The following tables may also be useful :— _ 
TABLE A 

San Sei ee 
Signs Colour Place Caste Direction 

Bier 
Mesha Red Jungle Kshatria East 
Vrishaba White Field Sudra South 
Mithuna Ash Bed Merchant West 
Kataka White Pit Brahmin North 
Simha Red Hill Kshatria East 
Kanni Black Fertile Sudra South 
Thula White Bazaar Merchant West 
Vrischika Ash Hole Brahmin North 
Dhanus Red Govern- Kshatria East 

ment 

Makara Black Jungle Sudra South 
Kumbha Ash Potter’s Merchant West 
Meena Black Sea Brahmin North 






TABLE.B 












; Mode of ‘ 
Signs rising. Legs Time Organ 
EE eee AE OS RS re te 

Mesha Prishtodaya Quadruped Night Head 

Vrishaba Prishtodaya Quadruped Night Face 

Mithuna  Sirodaya Biped Night Chest 

Kataka Prishtodaya Reptile Night Heart 

Simha Sirodaya Quadruped Day Belly 

Kanni Sirodaya Biped Day Rib 

Thula Sirodaya Biped Day Abdomen 

Vrischika Sirodaya Reptile Day Sexual 

organ 

Dhanus Prishtodaya First half Night Laps 
Biped & 
2nd Quadr. 

Makara _‘ Prishtodaya_~_- First _half Night Upper 
Quadr. & knees 
2nd Biped 

Kumbha _ Sirodaya Biped Day Lower -- 

knees 

Meena Siroprishto- Reptile Day Feet 

daya 





a 


Prishtodaya means rising by leg, Sirodaya means rising by 
head and Siroprishtodaya means by both. 


8 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


ASPECTS 


(1) Movable signs will aspect fixed signs but not their 
next fixed sign. 

(2) Fixed signs will aspect movable signs but not their 
next movable sign. 

(2) Common signs will aspect each other. 


The aspects formed in the cardinal signs are the strongest, 
those in the fixed signs come next and those in the common 
signs last. 


Aspect means exertion of influence by one sign on another 
and such influence may be good or bad according to the nature 
of the aspecting sign. Thus Mesha, which is a movable sign, 
will aspect or influence the fixed signs of Simha, Vrischika and 
Kumbha. 3 


EFFECTS 


_ A feminine planet in a feminine sign may cause feminine 
influence and similarly a masculine planet in a masculine sign 
may cause masculine influence. A planet in a fiery sign will 
cause fiery temperament. If such a planet is also fiery like the 
Sun or Mars, the effect will be positive. A planet in an airy 
sign may cause intellectual attainment. Similarly, one has to 
blend the qualities of planets with those of other signs occupied 
by them. If many planets are in Movable signs, the native’s 
life will be that of travelling; if they are in Fixed signs, he will 
be fixed to the same place or may cause stability ; and if they 
are in Common signs, the effect will be midway and of common- 
place nature. Benefics posited in Fruitful signs may cause pro- 
geny while malefics in Barren signs deny it. Thus, one has to 
apply the characteristics of the signs intelligently according to 
circumstances. 


CHAPTER III 
DIGNITIES AND QUALITIES OF PLANETS 


Before diving deep into this subject it is essential to know 
about the natural characteristics of the Planets. Some of the 
planets are good by nature and they are called Benefics, while 
some are bad in disposition and they are called Malefics. Jupiter 
is the most benevolent planet ; and by nature he is honourable, 
beneficent and charitable. Next comes Venus, who is associated 
with love and pleasure. The Moon is the planet of fecundation, 
but his nature is dependent on the amount of light which he 
possesses. In the bright half of the Lunar Month his lights will 
be increasing and on the Full Moon Day he will have his full 
strength. The Waxing Moon is therefore considered as a benefic 
and the Waning Moon as a malefic. Mercury is a planet of 
reason and education. He becomes-a benefic if he associates 
with a benefic and a malefie if he associates with a malefic. 
Mars is the planet of action and he is considered to be a malefic. 
The Sun is the lord of vitality’and’heis also a natural malefic. 
Saturn is the planet of obstruction and death and his malefic 
nature is worse than that of the Sun or Mars. Of all the planets, 
the worst malefics are the Dragons, who will spoil by their asso- 
ciation even Jupiter, the greatest benefic. 


There are certain signs of the Zodiac which the planets own 
and they are usually called the Houses of the Planets. Such 
houses are also known as Celestial Houses as distinguished from 
Mundane Houses that cover the events of human life. A planet 
in his own house will be jubilant and will consequently cause 
results in profusion according to its nature. Besides its own 
house, each planet has an Exaltation Sign (Ucchasthana) and 
if it occupies such a sign it will be in the zenith of its strength. 
Similarly, each planet has a Depression Sign (Neechasthana) 
and the planet in depression will be in the nadir of its powers. 
The other signs of the zodiac will be either their friends’ 
houses or enemies’ houses. In friends’ houses they will rejoice 
while in the enemies’ they will feel ill at ease. The Tables A 


10 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


and B will show such houses and they should be mastered well 
before proceeding further, as they will frequently be referred to 
in the subsequent chapters for predictive purposes. 


NoTE.—(a) Depression is the seventh sign of the exaltation sign. 


(b) Aspect means the exertion of influence by a planet 
on another house from the place occupied by him. 
Every planet will aspect the 7th place. But Mars, 
Jupiter, Saturn and Dragons have got special 
aspects besides the aspect on the 7th as noted in 
Table B. 


TABLE A 





Own Houses 


Exaltation 





Depression Moolatrikona 
The Sun Simha Mesha Thula Simha 
(Last 10) 
The Moon Kataka Vrishaba Vrischika Vrishaba 
(Last 27) 
Mars Mesha and Makara Kataka Mesha 
Vrischika (First 12) 
Mercury Mithuna and Kanni Meena Kanni 
Kanni (1-15) (16-20) 
Jupiter Meena and Kataka Makara Dhanus 
Dhanus (First 10) 
Venus — Vrishaba and Meena Kanni Thula 
Thula (Last 3) _ 
. Saturn Makara and Thula Mesha Kumbha 
Kumbha (First 20) 
Rahu Mithuna Dhanus Vrischika 
Kethu Dhanus Mithuna Vrischika 





SLANVId dO SAILITVNO GNV SALLINSIG 


TI 


OE LT LL 


Planets 


pT AIDS Elen I eA Cee LEER ar TR ae 


The Sun 


The Moon 


Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Saturn 


Dragons 


Friends 


Moon, Mars & 
Jupiter 


Sun & Mercury 


Jupiter, Moon 
&Sun - 


Sun, Venus & 
Dragons 


Mars & the 
Lights 


Merc., Sat. & 
Dragons 


Merc., Venus & 
Dragons 


Merc., Venus & 
Saturn 


TABLE B 
Enemies Aspects 
Saturn, Venus 7th place 
& Dragons 
Dragons 7th 
Mercury 477T& 8 
Moon 7th 
Merc., Venus 5,7&9 
& Dragons 
The Lights 7th 
Mars & the 3,7&10 
Lights 
Jupiter & 3,6& 11 


the Lights 





Character 


Malefic (3/4th) 


Benefic but a 
waning Moon 
is a malefic 

Malefic 

Benefic (half) 

Benefic 

Benefic (3/4th) 


Malefic 


Malefic 


Duration 
in signs 





1 month 


24 days 


14 months 


1 month 


1 year 


1 month 


24 years 


14 years 


LT 


cL 


ADOIOULSY NGNIH dO STVLNANVGNNS 


TABLE C 











Planets Sex Colour Corners Movements Stature Elements 
The Sun Male Red East Fixed Middle Bile. 
The Moon Female White N. West Movable Short Cold 
Mars Male Red South Movable Short Bile 
Mercury Eunuch Green North Common Short Wind 
Jupiter Male Yellow N. East Common Tall Wind 
Venus Female White S. East Fixed Medium Cold 
‘Saturn Eunuch Black West Common Tall Wind | 
Rahu ae Black S. West Movable Tall Bile 
Kethu Eunuch » Red Sky Movable Tall Bile 





SLANV1d 4O SAILIIVNO GNV SAILINSIG 


et 


TABLE D 


ei 








Planets Literature Caste Stones Grains Flower Metals 
The Sun Sanskrit Kshatrie. Ruby Wheat Lotus (Red) Cobve: 
The Moon Tamil Merchant Pearl Rice Lily Bronze 
Mars Hymns & Kshatria Coral Dal Red flowers Copper 

crude things 
Mercury Astrology & Merchant Emerald Green gram _ Leaves Brass & 
accounts f Mercury 
Jupiter Sanskrit Brahmin Topaz Bengal gram Jasmine Gold 
Venus Telugu Brahmin Diamond Beans Lotus (White) Silver 
Saturn Foreign Sudra Sapphire Sesame Violet Tron 
Rahu Foreign Neecha (Low) Agate Black gram Mantharai Lead 
Kethu Foreign Neecha (Low) Turquoise Horse gram Sevvulli Earth 


A ett enna tennessee seeerperennnenieerenennnmnanne 


v1 


ADOTOMLSV NGNIH JO STIVINANVGNNA 


CHAPTER IV 
ACCIDENTAL DIGNITIES 


A planet is prone to do good or bad things for the native 
according to the place occupied by it from the Ascendant. This 
position of the planet is called the Accidental Dignity of the 
planet. The strength of a planet may have also to be gauged by 
its Essential Dignity, which means the occupation of a good or 
bad sign like Exaltation, Own House, Moolatrikona, Depression, 
Enemy’s sign etc. Besides these two kinds of dignities, a planet 
acquires strength in several other ways and they are considered 
separately in the coming chapters. Let us now consider the 
planetary strength on account of Accidental Dignities. The 
following are the technical names of such dignities : 


Trikonas (Trines) —5th, and 9th places from 
Lagna. 

Kendras (Quadrants) =Ist, 4th, 7th and 10th places 

Panaparas (Succeedents) —2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th places 
(The next sign of a kendra) 

Apoklimas (Cadents) —3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th places 
(The next sign of a 

é panapara) 

Upachayas —3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th places 

Beeda rasis —1, 2, 4,7, 8,9 and 12th places 

Nasasthanas or Dhusthanas —6th, 8th and 12th places 


Badhaka Sthanas —11th for Movable Sign, 9th for 
y Fixed Sign and 7th for 
Common Sign. 


fy 


Trines are generally good places. The lords of trines give 
always very good results. Lord of the 9th is more powerful than 
that of the 5th, who is more powerful than that of the first. 
Benefics occupying these places give good results while the 
malefics do not. 


16 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Quadrants are also generally good places. But if benefic 
planets become lords of kendras they become powerless and 
deter the occurrence of beneficial events of a person. However, 
there is an exception that if the planet owning kendra houses 
happens to own the first house also at the same time, there is no 
such, bad effect. If benefics occupy the quadrants without having 
the ownership of such places they give good results. Jupiter and 
Venus are strong in giving bad effects but Mercury is only half- 
inclined. This kind of ownership is called ‘ Kendradhipathya 
Dhosha’. 


Any planet occupying the kendras is prone to do only good. 
Out of the four kendra houses, 10th is most powerful; next 
comes 7th, then 4th and then Ist. 


Upachayas are also good. Malefics occupying these places 
give better results than the benefics. Ownership of these houses 
is not good though the occupation is good. The lord of the 11th 
is more powerful than that of.the.10th who is more powerful 
- than that of the 6th, who is more powerful than that of the 3rd. 
Of these four places, the 10th is to be treated as only a quadrant 
and 6th as a Nasasthana. But. this Nasasthana is not so bad as 
the 8th place. 


Beeda rasis and Nasasthanas are always very bad. The lord 
of the 8th house gives very bad results, so also the lords of the 
6th and 12th houses. The lord of the 2nd house generally gives 
good results. 


Panaparas and Apoklimas are not so good as the quadrants 
and the results are given according to the planets’ strength there. 


Badhakasthanas are not generally good and in those places 
the planets become so sensitive that they affect adversely if they 
receive adverse aspects. 


(NotE.—Who the lord of a particular house is, is dealt with 
under Adipathya in Chapter VI.) 


CHAPTER V 


ESSENTIAL DIGNITIES 


The Essential dignities of the planets are as follows : 


Moolatrikona or \ Blazing 
Exaltation 

Friends’ houses Happy 

Own House Confident 

Benefic aspects \ Calm 

& conjunctions 

Defeated Tortured 

Enemies’ Houses Dejected 

Malefic aspects ‘i Mean 

& conjunctions 

Setting Failing 

Depression Fear 


—Gives happiness, reputation, 
affluence and lands. 


—Happiness, high status and 
learning. 

—Prosperity, success and 
servant-maids. 


—Courage, happy occupation 
and relative’s aid. 


—Enmity, Family quarrels 
and punishment by kings. 

Mental uneasiness. 

—Loss of children. 


—Diseases, losses and un- 
expected troubles. 


—Loss by fire or theft, and 
troubles. 


Planetary Sets 


(a) The Sun, Mars and Saturn are said to be at set when 
they are placed in the 8th or 12th place from the Lagna. 


(b) The Moon, Mercury and Jupiter will set at 3rd, 6th, 


8th and 12th places. 


(c) Venus will set at 3rd and 8th places. 


When a planet is at set, it has no power. 


2 


18 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Eclipse or Combust (Asthangatha) 


A planet will be said to be an Asthangatha one when it is 
within a particular limit from the Sun, its light being obscured by 
the light of the Sun. This limit varies with the different planets 
as follows : 


Marsh when within 17° from the Sun — 
Mercury re Lares “ 

». When retrograde | PO ara i z 
Jupiter when within Lies < 
Venus sf 10° 3 = 

» When retrograde Sess 99 
Saturn |e ast ” 
The Moon 12 >» 


The planet in combustion’-has no strength and hence it 
cannot do any good ; and if a.malefic is afflicted, there will be 
more harm. 


Elevation 


The planet which is nearest to the Midheaven (cusp of the 
10th house) is said to be in Elevation. For instance, a planet 
in the 11th house would be elevated above that on the 12th, and 
the planet in the 10th would be elevated above that on the 11th 
or 9th. Similarly, the planets in the 3rd or 5th would be 
elevated above the planets in the 4th. If benefics elevate above 
malefics there will be prosperity but if the latter are in elevation 
the evil effects will be more perceptible than the good effects 
when the benefics are in elevation, and the native will struggle 
for his life. 


Relationship between a planet and a sign 


A short method of finding out the relationship of a particular 
planet with a sign is that the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 8th and 12th houses 


ESSENTIAL DIGNITIES ~~ 19 


from the Moolatricona rasi of a particular planet is his friendly 
sign and its lord is his friendly planet. When these houses happen 
to be the exaltation sign, depression sign or its own house, they 
would not be taken into consideration. The remaining signs, viz., 
3, 6, 7, 10 and 11th are inimical. 


As an example, let us take Saturn in Vrishaba. Saturn’s 
Moolatricona rasi is Kumbha. Vrishaba relating to Venus is the 
4th of Kumbha, and Thula which is also Venus’s house is 9th of 
Kumbha. As 4th and 9th places are friendly places of Saturn, 
Vrishaba and Thula are friendly and their lord Venus also 
becomes a friend. Since Thula is his exaltation sign, it will be 
taken only as an exaltation sign. When, of the two houses 
(except Kataka and Simha), one becomes friendly and the other 
inimical, the natural conclusion is that that planet is only a 
neutral and that both the houses are neutral signs. 


The friends and enemies of-a planet are noted in Table B 
also. Those who are not mentioned as friends or enemies are 
neutrals. For practical purposes, if the enemies of a planet are 
well remembered that will do, as the rest will be construed as 
friends or neutrals. It is.also. mot. necessary to give utmost 
importance to the relationship of the Dragons since their combi- 
nation with any other planet will mar the qualities of the other 
planet more or less. Hence, if the following words are com- 
mitted to memory, they may be of. immense use in the prediction 
of events : 


Sunvest —Sun’s enemies are Venus and Saturn, 
V, standing for Venus and St. for 
Saturn. The intervening vowel 
should be omitted. ™ 


Moon —No enemies. 

Marsomy —Mercury is the enemy of Mars. 
Mercuriem —Moon is Mercury’s enemy. 
Jupitovemy —Venus and Mercury are Jupiter’s foes. 
Venusmus —Moon and Sun are enemies of Venus. 


Saturnmusmar —NMoon, Sun and Mars are Saturn’s foes. 


FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Exalt. | 











Sun Friend | Sun Sun Ene. Sun Neutr. 
Moon Neutr. Moon Neutr. Moon Exalt. Moon Friend 
Mars Friend | Mars Own Mars Neutr. Mars Ene. 
Mer. Neutr. Mer. Neutr. Mer. Friend | Mer. Own 
Jup. Own Jup. Friend | Jup. Ene. Jup. Ene. 
Ven. Exalt. Ven. Neutr. | Ven. Own Ven. Friend 
Sat. Neutr. | Sat. Dep. Sat. Friend | Sat. Friend 
Rahu Friend Rahu Ene. Rahu Neutr. Rahu Exalt. 
Kethu Friend | Kethu Ene. Kethu Neutr. | Kethu Dep. 
Sun Ene. Sun Friend 
Moon Neutr. | Moon Own 
Mars Neutr. | Mars Dep. 
Mer. Neutr. | Mer. Ene. 
Jup. Neutr. | Jup. Exalt. 
Ven. Friend | Ven. Ene. 
Sat. Own Sat. Ene. 
Rahu Ene. |* Rahu Ene. 
Kethu Ene. CHART SHOWING Kethu Ene. 
oe ae ESSENTIAL DIGNITIES Raa Gan 
Moon Neutr. Moon Friend 
Mars Exalt. Mars Friend 
Mer. Neutr. Mer. Friend 
Jup. Dep. Jup. Friend 
Ven. Friend Ven. Ene. 
Sat. Own Sat. Ene. 
Rahu Ene. Rahu Ene. 
Kethu Ene. Kethu Ene. 
Sun Friend | Sun Friend | Sun Neutr. Sun Neutr. 
Moon Neutr. Moon Dep. Moon Neutr. Moon Friend 
Mars Friend | Mars Own Mars Neutr. Mars Ene. 
Mer. Neutr. Mer. Neutr. Mer. Friend | Mer. Exalt. 
Jup. Own Jup. Friend | Jup._ Ene. Jup. Ene, 
Ven. Neutr.| Ven. Neutr.| Ven. Own Ven. Dep. 
Sat. Neutr. Sat. - Ene: Sat. Exalt. Sat. Friend 
Rahu Dep. Rahu Friend | Rahu Friend | Rahu Friend 


Kethu Exalt. 


Kethu Friend 


Kethu Friend 








Kethu Friend 


CHAPTER VI 


SIX SOURCES OF STRENGTH OF PLANETS 
(SHAD-BALAS) 


The planets acquire strength from six sources, viz., 
Sthanabala (Position), Drigbala (Aspect), Naisargika bala 
(Natural strength), Chestabala (Strength of motion) Dik bala 
(Strength of direction) and Kalabala (Strength of time). 


(1) Sthanabala :—Planets occupying exaltation sign or 
Moolatrikona rasi, friend’s house, own house and own 
Navamsa will be powerful. They become powerless if they are 
in depression, if they conjunct malefic or inimical planets, if 
they are eclipsed by the Sun’s rays or if they are defeated in the 
Planetary War. 


If a planet is retrograde it has got the strength of an exalta- 
tion sign and if it is Vargothama, the strength of an own house. 
Vargothama means the occupation by a planet in the Navamsa 
Chart the same sign as in the Rasi Chart. Regarding the 
preparation of Navamsa Chart, it is considered separately in 
Chapter VIII. 


Planetary War :—If two or more planets occupy the same 
amsa there will be a war, in which the planet which has more 
natural strength will win. The planet occupying the previous star, 
amsa or of another planet becomes successful in the war. 


Drigbala :—Aspects formed by benefics make the planet 
powerful and those formed by malefics or enemies make it 


powerless. 


A planet having good position such as exaltation, friendly 
sign etc., and good adipathya will be considered as a good planet 
and if such a planet aspects another, the latter becomes powerful. 
Similarly, a planet occupying a very bad place and possessing a 
bad adipathya inflicts another planet by its aspect, 


22 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Adipathya :—Adipathya means ownership of houses. The 
signs owned by the planets are mentioned in Table A of 
Chapter III The following chart will be helpful : 
























- Jupiter’s Mars’ Venus’ Mercury’s 
House House House House 
Saturn | Moon 
Saturn Sun 

2 | 
Jupiter Mars | Venus Mercury 





From. the above it may be seen that each planet owns the 
sign of the opposite row excepting the Sun and the Moon who 
own only one house. 


Example :— 





Mars 
Mer. 
Venus 


Sat. | Sun 


Kethu 





Lagna 


— Jupiter 


t 
NS SSE AS 


Ifa planet owns good houses from the lagna, viz., quadrants, 
trines and 2nd and 11th places, then that planet is said to have 
got a good ownership of houses. But if he is the lord of the 3rd, 


SIX SOURCES OF STRENGTH OF PLANETS 23 


6th, 8th or 12th houses from Lagna, then he is said to be a 
malefic in the respect that he owns bad houses from the 
Ascendant. 


Let us take Venus. He is the lord of Thula and Vrishaba, 
which are 2nd and 9th houses from Lagna. This adipathya is 
good and therefore he is prone to do good. Taking Jupiter, he 
owns 4th and 7th houses from the Ascendant and this adipathya 
will ordinarily be considered as good. But it is not good as 
Jupiter is a benefic and he should not own~Kendra houses as 
mentioned in Chapter IV. Even though Jupiter is a natural 
benefic, he will not do any good for this horoscope because of 
the Kendrathipathya, In the case of Mars, he is the lord of the 
3rd and 8th places and he has therefore got bad ownership. His 
natural aptitude is also bad. Hence he is prone to do only evil 
things. 


(3) Naisargika Bala :—The natural strength of the planet 
is in the following order : 


Rahu and*Kethu 
The Sun 

The Moon 
Venus 

Jupiter 

Mercury 

Mars 

Saturn 


SoS OR ee OO Pe 


(4) Chestabala :—The Sun and the Moon have this kind 
of strength in Uttarayana, that is, when they are in the Northern 
latitude. Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus have this kind of 
strength when they are retrograde or triumphant in planetary 
war. Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn have this source 
of strength when they pass through Mercury’s houses. 


(5) Dikbala :—Mercury and Jupiter have this source of 
strength if they occupy the Lagna. The Moon and Venus are 
powerful in the 4th house, Saturn in the 7th and the Sun and 
Mars in the 10th, 


24 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


- (6) Kalabala :—The Moon, Saturn and Mars are strong 
at night. The Sun, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are powerful 
during day. Mercury is always strong. Benefics are strong in 
bright half of a lunar month and malefics are strong in the dark 
half. 


MAGNITUDE OF THE SOURCES OF STRENGTH 


Position (Sthanabala) 10 


Aspect (Drigbala) 3 
Nature (Naisargikabala ) 1 
Motion (Chestabala) 1 
Direction (Dikbala) 4 
Time (Kalabala) 1 

Total 20 


The strength of position is méasured as follows : 


In Exaltation a planet has its full power 


In Own House a aoe 
In Friendly sign ,, ith <5 
In Trines and Quadrants 4 $3 


In Enemies’ signs and depression Nil. 


Note.—Before examining a horoscope the strength of each 
planet according to the above method should be ascertained. 


(oo5 
CHAPTER VII F v N 
ERECTION OF A BIRTH CHART 


How to place planets in a horoscope :—If you take an 
almanac published in South India and see the date of birth, you 
will find a map on that page itself setting forth the planetary 
positions for the month. But the Moon would not have been 
placed anywhere in the map, which you yourself will have to 
do, as she is leaving a sign in every two and a quarter days. To 
locate the Moon, find out the asterism that is rising at the time 
of birth and also find out the quarter (pada) of the asterism in 
which the birth takes place. This asterism will represent the 
star in which the Moon stays at the time of birth. From this 
asterism the sign allotted to it can be found out as pointed out 
in Chapter I. 

For instance, if a child is born on 7th of the month of 
Kataka (4th month) in the year Bhava, at 11 a.m., the asterism 
of the day is Anuradha as can be found out from the Almanac. 
The duration of this asterism isabout 564 ghatikas and each 
quarter will come to 148th ghatikas. Assuming that Anuradha 
commenced at 23 ghatikas of that day, the first pada (quarter of 
the asterism will prevail for 144th ghatikas from 24 ghatikas 
when this star rose. Hence the first pada will prevail up to 16éth 
ghatikas of that date. As the child is born at 11 am., or 123 
ghatikas the first pada of Anuradha will be the birth asterism. 
For Anuradha whole, the sign is only Vrischika as mentioned in 
Chapter I. Hence the Moon should be placed in Vrischika. 


The duration of the asterism for a particular day may be 
found out as follows : 
Birth at 15th ghatika on 1-8-1935: the asterism as noted 
in the almanac is as below : 
1-8-1935 - Aswini till 8 ghatikas 20 vighatikas 
2-8-1935 - Bharani till 4 ghatikas 10 vighatikas 
The duration of Bharani on 1-8-1935 is 


60 ghatikas minus 8 gh. 20 vigh. 51-40 
The duration of Bharani on 2-8-1935 is 4-40 
Total duration of Bharani is 56-20 


onan 





26 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Notr.—(1) A day commences from the sun-rise and 
ghatikas are counted from the sun-rise accord- 
ing to the Hindus, unlike the Westerners who 
take mid-night i.e., 12 o’clock at night as the 
commencement of a day. 


(2) If the time of birth is noted according to the 
Railway time which is only Indian Standard 
Time, it should be converted to the local time 
of the place of birth. The method of finding 
out this time is not incorporated in this book 
since any modern almanac will show this 
method. 


(3) The following table may be useful : 
1 day is equal to 60 ghatikas (24 hours) 
1 ghatika = 60 Vighatikas © 
1 Hour = 2% ghatikas 


_ To find out the Lagna.or the Ascendant 


After placing all the planets-on the map you will have neces- 
sarily to note the rising sign of the, native. Find out the month in 
which a child is born. From ‘thatyou can find out the sign 
occupied by the Sun. This sign will rise at first along with the 
Sun. The portion of the rising sign that had already passed or 
risen before the sun-rise will be in proportion to the days that 
had already elapsed in the month. Deducting this proportionate 
duration of the sign (lagna) that had already passed, from the 
total duration of the particular sign, the balance will represent 
the ghatikas that still remain, up to which the sign will be in the 
direct East. To this figure add the duration of the other succeed- 
ing lagnas till the birth-time falls on a particular lagna. This lagna 
is the Janma Lagna, which is otherwise called as the Rising sign 
or the Ascendant. 


Example.—Child birth-4th of the 4th month of Kataka at 
Sth ghatika. 


In the month of Kataka the Sun will be in Kataka that is 4th 
from Mesha. The total duration is 54 ghatikas. The portion of 
the month that has already passed till the date of birth is 3/30 


ERECTION OF A BIRTH CHART 27 


and the ‘proportion that still remains is 27/30 ; the proportionate 
27 ik 257 


time that still remains in Kataka is — x — = —~ = 4 ghatikas 
3052 60 
57 vighatikas. 
The balance of lagna therefore is 4 gh. 57 vigh. 


Add: Next sign’s (Simha’s) period 5 gh. 30 vigh. 


Total Fave EY) ZT 


Hence upto 10 gh. 27 vigh., Simha lagna prevails. As the 
child is born at the 5th ghatika, the sign arising at this time is 
Simha, which is called the Ascendant of the native. 


Finding out the dhasa commencing at the time of birth 


Having placed all the planets in the map and fixed the 
Lagna, the next thing of importance is to find out the dhasa period 
that has to commence from the date of birth. This calculation is 
essential in determining the. period...which a person is passing 
through at a future date. Before dealing with this, it is necessary 
to learn the order of the dhasa periods and their total number of 
years. The ancients have assumed that a person will live only 
for 120 years and divided the life into the following periods. The 
order of the planetary dhasas given below should not be 
changed : 


1. Sun's dhasa .< .. 6. years 
2. Moon’s es Rated | ie 
3. Mars’s is oa 7 eee 
4. Rahu’s a Benes aoe 
52 Jupiters. 3. ee AG; 
6. Saturn’s 5 ; feces Ws Jessen 
7. Mercury’s_,, Bales My eo 
8. Kethu’s i ee fee 
9, Venus’s Si ee ee 


Total 2120 


28 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


What dhasa commences for a particular individual at the 
time of birth has to be found out from his birth asterism. Count 
the number of that asterism from Aswini. From that number 
subtract 2 and divide the remainder by 9. The balance is the 
dhasa counted from the Sun’s period that has to commence at 
the time of birth. After this dhasa the subsequent dhasas will 
prevail in the above order. 


Example——The asterism of a native is Purvabadrapada, 
which is 25th from Aswini. Deducting 2 from 25, the remainder 
is 23, which, if divided by 9, yields a balance of 5. The fifth 
dhasa from the Sun’s is Jupiter’s, which has to commence at the 
time of birth. 


To find out the period in a dhasa that has gone in pregnancy 
before the time of birth 


At first find out the total number of years of the dhasa that 
has to commence at the time of birth. Then find out the total 
number of ghatikas of the birth-star and the portion of that star 
which has elapsed before «-birth-time. Divide the number of 
ghatikas that had already gone by the total number of ghatikas 
of the asterism. Multiply the result by the number of years of 
the dhasa period that has to commence from the date of birth. 
This will give the number of years that had already gone before 
the time of birth. Deducting this from the total number of years 
of the dhasa, the balance will be the period in that dhasa that 
still remains to be counted from the date of birth. 


/ 


Example : 
Birth asterism ..  Krithikai 
Duration of asterism nis OUSON. 


Ghatikas gone before birth-time in 
Krithikai Soe ycchO Sh; 


Krithikai’s dhasa lord is the Sun whose 
period is = 6 years 


ERECTION OF A BIRTH CHART 29 


Divide 10 by 60; the result is 10/60 or 1/6th. Multiply 
1/6th by 6 years, which comes to 1 year. Therefore one year 
has gone in birth in the Sun’s period. The balance that still 
remains to be counted is 6 —1=5 years. After 5 years from 
the date of birth of the native, the Moon’s dhasa will commence 
and last for 10 years, and then Mars’s dhasa for 7 years and 
so on. 


To find out the Bhukti or sub-period of a dhasa 


Every dhasa is divided into minor periods. These minor 
periods are called Bhuktis. The first bhukti in a dhasa is that 
of the lord of the dhasa itself. Then the subsequent bhuktis will 
prevail in the same order as that mentioned for the dhasa periods. 
In order to find out the period of a particular bhukti in a dhasa, 
multiply the dhasa lord’s period by the bhukti-lord’s dhasa-period. 
Divide the result by 10 which gives the total number of months 
of the particular bhukti in the dhasa. After this bhukti, the next 
bhukti will be in the same ordervas that mentioned for the dhasa- 
periods but the period of every bhukti has to be found out as 
mentioned in this paragraph... Tables.of these periods are also 
given below for ready reference. 






























SUN—6 YEARS MOON—10 YEars MARS—7 YEARS 
Krithikai Rohini Mrigasirisha 
Uttarapalguni Hastha Chitrai 
Uttarashada Sravana Sravishta 

Ss 2 | 3 

Bhuktis Y. M. D.| Bhuktis oy eg Bhuktis  -Y.M. D. 
Sun 0 3 18| Moon 010 0: Mars 0 427 
Moon 0 6 O| Mars 0 7 O: Rahu 1 018 
Mars 0 4 6| Rahu 1 6 0: Jupiter 011 6 
Rahu 0 10 24| Jupiter 1 4 0; Saturn 1 Sle 9 
Jupiter 0 9 18) Saturn 1 7 0; Mercury 0-11 27 
Saturn 0 11 12} Mercury 1 5 0; Kethu 0 427 
Mercury 010 6} Kethu 0 7 O: Venus 12520 
Kethu 0 4 6| Venus 1 8 0O/}Sun 0 4 6 
Venus 1 O O/} Sun 0 6 0; Moon OP F68 

6 0 0 10 0 0 700 


i 
| 


30 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY - 


NR SETS EE COE 



































zs | 
RAHU—18 Years | JUPITER—16 YeEars| SATURN—19 Years 
soe 
Arudhra Punarvasya Pushya 
Swati Visaka Anuradha 
Sathabisha Purvabadrapada Uttarabadrapada 
4 | 5 6 
Bhuktis  Y.M “p.| Bhuktis — -y. M. p.| Bhuktis eM. 
Rahu 2 8 12] Jupiter 2 1 18) Saturn aes (ek 
Jupiter 2 4 24) Saturn 2 6 12} Mercury 25829) 
Saturn 2 10 6] Mercury 2 3 6) Kethu j ees HSS 
Mercury 2 6 18] Kethu 011 6) Venus Seca O) 
Kethu 1 O 18] Venus 2 8 O| Sun OGLE SES. 
Venus 3 O O| Sun 0 9 18} Moon j ope Bank 
Sun 0 10 24) Moon 1 4 0} Mars Leslie 3 
Moon 1 6 O| Mars 011 6; Rahu 2410756 
Mars 1 0 18) Rahu 2 4 24} Jupiter 2: Oe 
18 0 0 16 0 0 19 0 0 
MERCURY-17 YEars| KETHU—7 Years VENUS—20 YEARS 
Aslesha Aswini Bharani 
Jyeshta Magha | Purvapalguni 
Revati Mula Purvashada 
if 8 9 
Bhuktis ¥: D.| Bhuktis Y. M. D.| Bhuktis Y. M. D. 
Mercury 2 4 27) Kethu 0 4 27) Venus 3 4 0 
Kethu 0 11 27} Venus 1 2 0; Sun bo 00 
Venus 210 O} Sun 0 4 6{| Moon 1 Bae. 
Sun 0 10 6] Moon 0 7 O| Mars | ERPS | 
Moon 1 5 O| Mars 0 4 27) Rahu 32.0520 
Mars 0 11 27} Rahu 1 O 18) Jupiter 2.2829 
Rahu 2 6 18! Jupiter 011 6) Saturn 322-06 
Jupiter 2 3 6) Saturn 1 1 9| Mercury 210 0 
Saturn 2 8 9} Mercury 0 11 27; Kethu 1238 
| 17-0260 £06 20 0 0 


o| 
rs 


CHAPTER VIII 
DIVISIONS OF SIGNS 


The signs are divided for astrological purposes into several 
parts and the planetary positions are also accordingly noted in 
order to determine the strength of the planets still further. There 
are several such divisions, of which the most important and 
more frequently used is Navamsa, which is a division of a sign 
into nine equal parts. It is quite sufficient for a beginner to 
confine himself with a study of this division. But if any one 
desires to understand the other divisions also, he may refer to 
other texts. 


Sphutas :—Before preparing the amsa charts one has to find 
out the planetary positions in degrees at the time of birth. In 
modern almanacs there are charts showing the degrees on which 
the planets are on every three days. From these one can find 
out the exact position of a planet at the time of birth by calcu- 
lating the time taken by a planet to reach the next point from 
the previous position. But..in.the..Hindu almanacs the move- 
ments of the planets are usually represented according to stellar 
quarters (padas). From these stellar quarters one can find out 
the degree which the planet was occupying at a particular time. 
Each sign contains 24 asterisms or nine stellar quarters and each 
quarter is equivalent to 31/; degrees. For example, if the Sun 
is stated to be in the first pada of Aswini, it will be there so 
for the first 31/3; days of the month of Mesha. As the planets 
are moving always, the Sun cannot, however, be considered to 
be in the 3!/, degree for the entire period of 31/3 days, but he 
must have been in the first degree on the first day, in the second 
degree on the second day and in the third degree on the third 
day and so on. Thus the position of each planet will have to be 
ascertained to a nicety by taking into account the time taken by 
a planet to leave one quarter for another and the proportionate 
lapse of that quarter till the time of birth. 


32 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


The following table will be of use in determining the posi- 
tion :— 


12 rasis or signs 
30 degrees 

60 minutes of arc. 
60 seconds of arc. 


Whole Zodiac 
1 Rasi or sign 
1 Degree 
1 Minute 


Hou tt tl 


Worked example :—-For a child born on 22-7-1934 at 
11-12 a.m. 


Planets. Padas. Rasi. Degree. Minute. Second. 
Sun Pushya Ist pada 3 6 52 16 
Moon Anuradha 2nd ,, 7 21 43 48 
Mars Arudhra 2nd: :; 2 12 8 46 
Mercury Punarvasya Ist ,, 2 21 31 50 

- Jupiter = -Hastha the SS 23 Sy 53 
Venus Mrigasirisha 4th | 5, 9 6 34 33 
Saturn Sravishta 4th_ Pesto 5 42 9 
Rahu Sravana 3rd= = 9 18 0 40 
Kethu Aslesha I St. cass 3 18 0 40 


- (Note.—As the movements of the Dragons are backward 
their positions should be calculated taking the time 
taken by them to reach the previous stellar quarter.) 


Navamsa 


Navamsa is the name given to the division of a sign into 
nine equal parts of 31/3 degrees each. 


(a) In the case of a Movable sign, the first part (Navamsa) 
is governed by the lord of that sign itself; the second by the 
lord of the second from the sign under consideration and so on. 


(b) In the case of a Fixed sign, the lord of the first navamsa 
is the lord of the 9th house from that sign and succeeding 
navamsas will begin only from this house (9th). 


(c) In the case of a Common sign, the lord of the first 
navamsa is the lord of the 5th from this sign and the succeed- 
ing navamsas will be countd from this. 


DIVISIONS OF SIGNS 33 


To be brief, the first navamsa from which the succeeding 
navainsas will have to be counted will be the movable sign, which 
is triangular (1, 5,9) to the sign under consideration. For 
instance, in the case of Aries, the triangular signs are Aries, Leo 
and Sagittarius, of which Aries is the only movable sign and 
hence the first navamsa will commence from Aries. In the case 
of Taurus, the triangular signs are Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn. 
For these signs the first navamsa will be Capricorn. In the case 
of Gemini and its triangular signs of Libra and Aquarius, the 
first navamsa will be the movable sign of Libra. 


Example :—Time of birth ae 12-55 


Deduct—Time up to which 
the previous lagna was 
prevalent oe 9-49 


Balance <a 3-6 in Virgo 





1/ th part of. Virgo, which is native’s Lagna 
is 5/ th ghatika: 


Divide 3 gh. 6 vig. by 5/y = 6th part. 


The sixth sign from Capricorn (which is the movable sign 
triangular to Virgo) falls on Gemini and hence this sign will 
be the Navamsa lagna. 


How to place the planets in the Navamsa Chart :—Find out 
the Nakshatra pada occupied by the planet at the time of birth. 
Calculate the total number of the padas that have elapsed from 
the first pada of Aswini. If the result is within 12, place the 
planets accordingly counting from Aries. If it exceeds 12, divide 
the result by 12 and the balance will be the navamsa from Aries. 


Example :—For the horoscope already illustrated under 
Sphutas the stellar quarters are given in the illustration. The 
Sun occupies the first pada of Pushya, which is the 29th stellar 
quarter from the first pada of Aswini. Divide 29 by 12. The 
balance is 5. The fifth sign from Aries is Simha, where the Sun 


A 


34 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


should be placed in the Navamsa chart. Similarly, for the other 
planets, the stellar quarters (nakshatra padas) occupied by them 
at the time of birth will have to be found out and from these 
the Navamsas of the other planets can be ascertained. The fol- 
lowing is the Navamsa chart of the horoscope illustrated :— 















| Mercury | | aie 
St 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Kethu = | Moon 





CHAPTER IX 


THE MUNDANE HOUSES OF THE HEAVENS 
OR BHAVAS 


The whole zodiac is divided, for the purpose of ascertain- 
ing the events of an individual, into twelve parts of 30 degrees 
each. Each part is called a house or Bhava, from which predic- 
tions are given. The distinction between a house and a sign is 
that the former starts from the Ascendant and deals with the 
events of a human life while the latter begins from the first 
degree of Aries and ends with the last degree of Pisces which 
affect a human life just like the planets do. 


The following may be predicted from the respective houses 
according to the strength of the planets and signs occupying 
them. 


First House or Lagna or The Ascendant :—This rules the 
personal appearance of the native. 


Activity, general life, birth, character, fame, and status may 
also be predicted. If an evil planet occupies or aspects this house 
there will be a mole or scar on the head or face. 


Second House :—This denotes the monetary affairs of the 
native, family and studies. 


The power and quality of speech, eyes, imagination, jewels 
and knowledge about shastras may also be predicted. This rules 
the neck and throat. As stated above if an evil planet occupies 
this house, there will be a mole or scar on the neck. 


Third House :—This concerns with the native’s younger 
brothers and sisters, and courage. 


Servants and subordinates, neighbours, ears, songs, royal 
help, appointment, letters and short journeys chiefly by rail or 
toad may also be found out. It rules hands, arms, ears and 
shoulders, : 


36 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Fourth House :—This signifies principally mother, house, 
education, comforts and inheritance. 


Relatives, conveyances, domestic quadrupeds, popularity, 
friendship and position at the close of life may also be predicted. 
It rules the stomach and breast. 


Fifth House :—This denotes offspring, intelligence, prestige 
and speculation. 


Previous Karma, next Janma and reputation may also be 
found out. It rules the heart and back. 


Sixth House :—From this can be found out diseases, ene- 
mies and inferiors. 


Injuries by weapon, loss of money, transfers, loan, and 
maternal uncle may also be predicted. This house rules the 
intestines and belly. 


Seventh House :—This denotes love and matrimony, wife or 
husband and public enemies. 


Partnership, law-suits, freedom, royal help and conjugal 
happiness may also be predicted. It rules veins and loins. 


Eighth House :—This signifies longevity, dangers, chronic 
diseases and obstacles. 


Mental worries, loss of money, deadly accidents, suits, wills 
and legacies may also be found out. It rules the privy parts. For 
females, widowhood has to be seen from this house. 


Ninth House :—This house depicts father’s position, elders 
and charities. 


Previous Janma, public beneficence, divine favour, medicine, 
birth of sons and daughters, grandson, long journeys and dwell- 
ing in forest or hills may also be predicted. It rules the hips and 
thighs. 


Tenth House :—This denotes the native’s occupation. Mercy, 
good deeds, reputation, travelling, means and mendicancy, wor- 
ship, and wishes may also be found out. It governs the knees. 


THE MUNDANE HOUSES OF THE HEAVENS OR BHAVAS 37 


Eleventh House :—This governs gains, elder brothers and 
sisters, clothes, jewels; education and happiness may also be 
found out. It rules legs and ankles. 


Twelfth House :—This rules expenditure, repose, journey, 
excellent beds, loss, government appointment ; secret enemies and 
assault may be predicted. It rules feet and toes. 


CHAPTER X 
THINGS GOVERNED BY PLANETS 


All the things in the Universe are ruled by the planets and 
it is essential to know what things are ruled by what planets. If 
the lord or significator of a particular thing is strong, such a 
thing will do favour to the native. The following points may 
have also to be remembered by a student so that he may be able 
to pronounce easy judgments :— 


The Sun rules father, soul, vitality, heart, right eye of a man 
and left eye of a woman, fevers, living in jungles and hills, inter- 
course with sick or mad woman, bravery, superiors, managers 
and government servants. 


The Moon governs mother, clothes, body, sound sleep, tuber- 
culosis, unsteady constitution, Jeft eye of a man and right eye 
of a woman, employment, baths, stomach, travellers, and the 
public at large. 


Mars is the lord of brethren, lands, weapons, anger, war, 
blood, operations, wounds, accidents, loans, enmity, loose morals, 
indulgence with widows, soldiers, surgeons, engineers, and photo- 
graphers. 


Mercury is the significator of education, friends, merchant, 
mathematics, astrology, dancing girls, nerves, lungs, accountants, 
teachers and book-sellers. 


Jupiter rules sons and daughters, brain, intelligence, wealth, 
tutorship, benevolence, physical development, right ear, liver, 
blood disorders, lawyers, clergymen, bankers, grocers and pre- 
ceptors. 


Venus governs wife or husband, house, love, sexual plea- 
sures, recreation, songs, conveyances, kidneys, generative organs, 
artists, songsters and scents dealers, 


THINGS GOVERNED BY PLANETS 39 


Saturn rules longevity, livelihood, servitude, menials, theft, 
sorrow, obstruction, widows, lame women, spleen, rheumatism, 
chronic diseases, dealers in land and property and labourers. 


Rahu rules father’s parents, studies, thefts, shooting, war, 
military people, witty conversation, poison, indulgence with sick 
women, jail, fetters, garrulousness, small-pox, epilepsy and 
biliousness. 


Kethu is the lord of mother’s parents, cunningness, sinful 
deeds, debts, leprosy, unexpected death, measles, itches, enmity, 
and snake charmers. 


CHAPTER XI 
RISING SIGNS AND THEIR INFLUENCES 


In this chapter the general influences of the rising signs are 
given so as to enable a student to have an idea of the influence 
of each sign. These descriptions will prove correct only when 
there are no planets in the sign or when there are no planetary 
aspects. If on the other hand, there is any planet or planetary 
aspect, the influence of such planet only will predominate. In 
judging the nature and character of the native, the qualities of 
Navamsa lagna may have also to be taken into consideration. 
There will be a tendency on the part of a student to apply the 
under-mentioned influences to his own case without considering 
the other aspects. He is thereforé warned that the following 
influences may have to be taKen only as guiding factors “und not 
as conclusive factors. 


Aries :—If the native’s rising sign is Aries, he will be lean 
and of medium height. He will have long face and neck, black 
eyes, dark complexion, rough hair and strong limbs. The dis- 
position will be angry, rough, quarrelsome, ambitious and quick. 
If the sign be aspected or occupied by Mars, the native will be 
interested in agricultural work, machinery or tools. If the sign 
be aspected by Jupiter he will have a humble profession. 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native will 
be a poor eater, fond of travels and will have bold eyes. 


Taurus :—If the Janma lagna be this, he will be a short, 
thick-set person. He will have a fair complexion, large nose and 
mouth, broad shoulders, dark hair and eyes, and the hairs some- 
times curling. The disposition will be angry, conceited and vio- 
lent, ill-natured, selfish in comforts, fond of drinks and a bad 
husband or wife. If Venus occupies or aspects, he will have 
many enjoyments. 


RISING SIGNS AND THEIR INFLUENCES 41 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native will 
be lethargic. He will also be very patient even at the time of 
adversity. | 


Gemini :—The person will be active. He will have long 
arms and hands, dark complexion, dark brown hair, black eyes 
and quick sight. The disposition will be scientific, fond of. read- 
ing, ambitious of fame, moderate eating and respectful. If the 
sign be aspected by Mercury, he will acquire knowledge of all 
arts and sciences. 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the person would 
like to. remain in his house often loving his own ease. He will 
also be ready-witted and quick in understanding things. 


Cancer :—He will be of moderate stature ; will have a round 
face, pale complexion, light-brown hair, weak constitution and 
grey eyes. The disposition will be,timid, dull, careless and harm- 
less. If this sign is aspected or occupied by the Moon, he will 
have great happiness and if occupied or aspected by Jupiter, he 
will have immense wealth and comforts. 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native will 
be a quick-walker and a short-set person. 


Leo :—Large stature, light hair, large and round head, ruddy 
complexion, grey eyes, quick sight, big bones and broad shoul- 
ders will be the appearance. The disposition will be bold, firm, 
ambitious, courteous, peevish, sportive, active and confident. 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native wil’ 
be short-tempered, and will not live with his mother mostly. 


Virgo :—Well-formed body but not handsome, ruddy com- 
plexion, round face, dark hair and eyes will be the appearance. 
The disposition will be ambitious, active and found of elocution, 
learning and curiosities. If occupied or aspected by benefics he 
will have immense wealth. He will have a household powerful 
god which will be helpful to him throughout his life. If Jupiter 
is in trines he will lose his lands, 


42 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native will 
have slipping clothes or dresses. He will often have down-cast 
eyes on account of shyness. He may enjoy at least for some 
time others’ property or live in others’ houses. 


Libra :—Tall straight body, smooth hair, round fac2, fine 
complexion and dark eyes will be the appearance. The disposi- 
tion is ambitious, and fond of the other sex. The native will 
have comforts, will be a man of a few words, truthful and skilled 
in trade. If the sign be occupied by Venus he will be an eminent 
gentleman. If the Sun is at trines he will be happy but if he is 
in other places his period will be unsatisfactory. 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native will 
be talking in a soft tone generally and will have two names. 
There may be troubles about wife or children. 


Scorpio :—Middle stature, robust health, thick-set body, 
broad face, dark complexion, brown, curly and plentiful hair and 
ill-made feet will be the appearance. The disposition will be 
reserved, ambitious, furious;-brutish and mischievous. If Mars 
occupies this sign, he will. have,.a.tendency to be cruel, mean- 
minded and devoid of charactér:’ If Mars aspects he will have 
a commanding spirit. The Moon at trines is good. 


_ The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native wil] — 
be more often than not mischievous and rude. 


Sagittarius :—Well-formed features, handsome, long face, 
ruddy complexion, high forehead, long nose, clear eyes and brown 
hair will be the appearance. The disposition will be bold and 
active, generous and open-hearted, fond of sports and recreations 
and ambitious of acquiring fame. If the birth takes place in the 
first half of the sign, he will be disposed to evil ways ; if it takes 
place in the second half, he will be wealthy. If Jupiter occupies 
this sign he will be affluent. Jupiter in trines will be good but 
Mercury in trines will be bad. 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native will 
have a short stature and a notable voice. He will also be self- 
interested, 


RISING SIGNS AND THEIR INFLUENCES 43 


Capricorn :—The native will be slender. He will have long 
thin face, thin beard, dark coarse hair and awkward gait. The 
disposition will be sharp, selfish, covetous and unstable. He will 
have wealth and happiness but weak intellect. If the sign be 
aspected by Saturn he will have a capricious stomach and will 
eat various kinds of foods ; and if aspected by benefics he will 


* be rich. 


The oustanding quality of this sign is that the native will 
have no stable employment and will be fond of travels. He will 
adjust his habits to his self-interest. 


Aquarius :—The native will be stout and strong. He will 
have a middle stature, fair complexion, fine hair and dark eyes. 
The disposition will be good and generous, fond of sports and 
recreation but pessimistic often. If aspected by benefics he will 
be a King. If Venus is at trines, wealth, lands and houses will 
increase but if he is in quadrants or friendly houses he may not 
render useful effects. If malefics aspect, the native will be poor, 
miserly, firm-minded, jealous’ and) addicted to thieving. 


The outstanding quality’ of thissign is that the native will 
be miserly and fond of club life. There will be anxiety and dis- 
grace for some time in his life. 


Pisces :—Fleshy pale face, sleepy dull eyes, brown hair, 
short legs and arms and sickly constitution will be the appear- 
ance of the native. The disposition will be dull, indolent, non- 
chalant and loving his own ease. If Jupiter aspects he will lead 
a long and comfortable life. If Venus occupies he will be wealthy. 


The outstanding quality of this sign is that the native will 
either drink water often or will have profuse perspiration. He 
may meet with a drowning accident. 


CHAPTER XII 
EFFECTS OF THE SUN IN EACH SIGN 


The Sun is the Giver of Life and his position at the time 
of birth influences not a little the character and disposition of 
the native. The effects of the sign occupied by him at the time 
of birth are as follows :— 


Aries :—The native will be self-assertive and aggressive. He 
will think too much of his position and energy and may not be 
amenable to reason. He will always like to be in the lead and 
will loathe to follow. He may be radical in thought and action. 
He will be greedy for the results of his endeavours and labour. 
He will be a spend-thrift and may always be in want. He will 
have the capacity of forcing the subordinates to work for him 
whenever necessary. 


Taurus :—The native’ ‘will’ be’ kind and peaceful but will be 
persistent in clinging to an idea once conceived. He will not 
relish contradiction and there will be difficulty in convincing him 
of the mistake, but if it is tactfully pointed out to him he will 
try to rectify it. He will have good executive ability and will be 
persevering and patient. He will be fond of arts and science, 
comforts and luxuries. He will be fortunate and will have 
inheritance. He will be keen on only material possessions. 
Though born with a good vitality he is likely to lose it in course 
of time on account of wasting habits. He is susceptible to dis- 
eases like enlargement of liver, heart disease and congestion of 
kidneys. 


Gemini :—The person born under this will be quick-witted 
and sprightly. He may have ability to express himself clearly 
and to the point. He will have a good memory, rapid learning 
and love of travels. He will be scientific, fine-looking and brisk. 
He will be easily worried and irritated, which will be reflected 
in his actions and his bodily health. He will be susceptible to 


EFFECTS OF THE SUN IN EACH SIGN _ 45 


flattery and consequently he will be mis-directed. He will be a 
good conversationalist. 


Cancer :— The native will be a conscientious worker and 
may be trusted for secrecy. He will often change his residence or 
vocation. He will be a coward and will have often cares and 
anxieties. He will have tenacity of purpose and will have good 
vitality. 


Leo :—Born under this, the native will be ambitious, noble 
and magnanimous. He will scorn to do mean things and will be 
a good leader. He will be a true friend and will have capability 
to win his way. He will be enthusiastic, quick-tempered and will 
have a good will-power and memory. 


Virgo :—The native will be cynical, critical, bigoted and 
sensitive to suggestion of healthiHe will not believe in things 
unless scientifically demonstrated.» He will be lazy but will drive 
his subordinates to work for him~and consequently there will be 
enmity. He will have new associations, and friends and will seek 
new ways and means for his*amelioration. He will be ingenious 
and versatile.! He will be fond of science, particularly chemistry 
and hygiene. 


Libra :—The person born under this will be very fond of 
pleasures. He will be an ardent worker. He will take up a 
vocation with a good zeal but will leave it suddenly, take up 
another and work with equal zeal, so that there will be no stability. 
He will be once very happy, enthusiastic and cheerful but all 
on a sudden he will get himself worried, and melancholic. 


Scorpio :—Born under this, the person will be honest, just 
and indefatigable. He will not be inclined to do work in half- 
measures but will go to one extreme or other. He will plead 
on behalf of others and will be ready to sacrifice himself for the 
good of others. He will be sarcastic and of uncertain temper. 
He will have a strong imagination with a clear and penetrating 
mind. If afflicted, he will bring anarchy and destruction ; and 
will be addicted to malpractice. 


46 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Sagittarius :—The native will be jovial and will be respected 
in society. His friends would like to have his company often. 
If born in the first part of this sign, he will be a gambler, crimi- 
nal and unscrupulous in the matter of satisfying his desires and 
passions. If born in the second part of this sign, he will be 
good, noble, moral and idealistic. He will also be orthodox, 
charitable and oriental in methods. He will try to avoid quarrels 
and will intervene on behalf of others and hence he may shine 
as a lawyer. He will be a very good conversationalist and will 
narrate things in an interesting way. He will be quick and ready- 
witted but will be proud and self-confident. 


Capricorn :—The person born under this will have a low 
vitality but will cling to life with tenacity. He is susceptible to 
colds, falls and bruises. He will feel shy in the presence of others. 
He will be fond of detective work. He will be jealous, 
suspicious, ambitious and presevering. He will be anxious about 
his services being recognised »by- others. He will have a good 
executive ability and will not feel quite at home if he is asked 
to work under others. Hence if he works under others he will 
feel himself worried and péssimistic.He will have no inclination 
for marriage, and if married he will not be at ease. 


Aquarius :—The native will be unsophisticated, shy and 
affable. Because of the simplicity he may have many friends. 
Though he differs on many points he will usually yield for the 
sake of harmony. He will be fond of science, philosophy and 
literature. He will not like the esteem of others and will be 
strong in their likes and dislikes. He will cling to an opinion 
formed of others. 


Pisces :—The native will be honest, methodical, cordial, 
sympathetic and sensitive. He can be entrusted with secrecy as 
he will be close-mouthed. He will have no inclination to exert 
himself much even for the purpose of exercising his own rights. 
He will be fond of good things and rich food, and will drink 
plentifully. 


CHAPTER XIII 
EFFECTS OF THE MOON IN EACH SIGN 


The Moon is the Lord of Mind and Body and his position 
at the time of birth largely influences the health and aptitude 
of the native. The following are the general effects on the various 
signs occupied by her at the time of birth. 


Aries :—The stature will be indifferent. The native will 
have a round face, round eyes and weak knees. There may be 
a black mole or mark of some injury either on his face, arm-pit 
or leg. He will be copper-coloured and will be a moderate eater 
of hot vegetable food; will be easily pleased; fond of sexual 
pleasures ; and liable to fits of anger. He will have deformed 
nails, uncertain disposition, self-respect, valour and temporary 
wealth. He will be capricious and afraid of water. There is a 
chance of improvement and a good result may be expected if 
he carries on business with -persons. having Kataka, Simha, 
Dhanus or Meena rasis. 1, 6 and 11th thithis are favourable. 
Tuesday is suitable. He will spend money on good purposes. 
He will have a wife suffering from diarrhoea. Critical time may 
be expected in the 3rd, 6th, 8th, 12th, 14th and 15th years, 
months or days of his life. There will be a public scandal against 
him. Military line or some independent profession is favourable 
to him. 


Taurus :—The native will be handsome and attractive. He 
will have a good gait, and a mole on the side of the hip or right 
leg. He will be a man of influence and will be aloof from the 
relatives. He will have a blessed life, patience, steady friendship, 
good nature and happiness in the middle and latter part of his 
life. There will be phlegmatic influences. Vrishaba, Mithuna, 
Kanni, Makara and Kumbha rasis are friendly to him and 
Kataka and Simha inimical. There will be adversity in the 1st, 
16th and 55th year, month or day. He will suffer from cold, 
diarrhoea or eye trouble. There will be unexpected wealth, dis- 


48 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


grace by the court of justice and capability to converse well. 
He will have interest in music or painting. 


Gemini :—Tall stature, copper-coloured eyes and curly hairs, 
pale face, flat nose, smiling face, garrulousness, crafty, active, 
witty, gallant, keen intellect, inclination for good eating, fond 
of music and dance, keen perception of others’ motives, strong 
in day time ; 1st, 7th and 12th thithis inauspicious ; Vrishaba, 
Simha, Kanni and Thula rasis friendly ; Kataka inimical ; insult 
from lower class women ; unexpected riches ; friends turning out 
ultimately as enemies ; fond of scientific and literary pursuits ; 
fond of travels ; more than one occupation ; and wearing a ring 
of green stone is auspicious. 


Cancer :—Tall stature, large bones, large eyes, high lips, 
walking quickly with body bent, influence of a woman, learned 
in astrology, good friends, many houses, wealthy, influential, 
moved by flattery, fond of »water and garden, strong at night, 
sufferings from coughs ; 2nd;-7th-and 12th thithis inauspicious ; 
Simha, Mithuna and Kanni. rasis, friendly ; accident by falling 
from a high place ; danger ‘from fire’; mole at the bottom of the 
privy parts ; loving wife ; inimical towards lower class people ; 
drowning accident ; improving the status by self-exertion ; fond 
of music, painting and poetry ; residing near river or sea ; incli- 
nation to make journeys on sea; and dealings in liquids. 


Leo :—Tall, fair large eyes, well-built body, smiling face, 
ambitious, sensitive, candid, hatred towards women, sufferings 
from tooth-ache and stomach ache, deformed limb, steady mind, 
attachment to mother, strong in day time; 3rd, 8th and 13th 
thithis inauspicious ; fond of pleasures ; liking towards flesh and 
forests ; lover of music, painting, poetry, perfumes and luxuries ; 
death in some sacred place; and feeding on the milk of two 
women at infancy. 


Virgo :—Middle stature, handsome, pale, black hair, ambi- 
tious, pensive, fond of sexual pleasures, god-fearing, learned in 
sciences, good memory, acquiring education easily, self-sacrific- 
ing nature, phlegmatic constitution, enjoying the house and pro- 


EFFECTS OF THE MOON IN EACH SIGN. 49 


perty of other people, living in foreign places, strong in day time ; 
Wednesday auspicious and Tuesday inauspicious ; mole on either 
neck, arm or back; suffering from coughs ; wicked wife ; many 
enemies ; happiness through servants ; vocation in medicines or 
food-stuffs or education. 


Libra :—Tall, well-built body, ruddy complexion, raised 
nose, defective limb, respectful to brahmins and religious people, 
intelligent, clean, influence by women, fond of travelling, rich, 
clever, strict in business dealings, a benefactor to his relatives 
who will reject him, strong in day time ; 4th, 9th and 14th thithis 
inauspicious ; garrulous, making friends easily, fall from a high 
place or horse-back, skin diseases, stomach ache, indulgence with 
many women, birth of many children, fond of music and poetry, 
desire to wear diamond ring, popular, and subject to be influ- 
enced by other people. 


Scorpio :—Short, fleshy, dark complexion, broad eyes, broad 
chest and thighs, black hair}.mole on the face, defective feet, 
wicked, fond of other sex, aloof from parents and teachers, 
indolent when young, lines’in°the palm of the shape of a fish, 
clean, flourishing trade, devoted wife, death after a chronic ill- 
ness, treacherous friends, fond of drinks, and self-reliant. 


Sagittarius : Short, handsome and symmetrical body, straight 
face, oval visage, big crooked teeth, disfigured nails, sunken belly, 
good, generous, ambitious, loss of paternal property, intelligent, 
charitable, strong in kinship, strong in day; 3rd, 8th and 13th 
thithis favourable ; Thursday auspicious ; Monday inauspicious ; 
Aries, Cancer, Leo and Scorpio auspicious ; a nice speaker, a poet, 
diverse occupations and undertakings, sincere and candid. 


Capricorn :—Short, lean, fine eyes, slender waist, black mole 
on the neck, vicious, loving to children and wife, quick in grasp- 
ing, attachment towards low-class women, shyness, miserly ; 4th, 
9th and 15th thithis inauspicious ; Saturday auspicious ; sympa- 
thetic, quarrelsome, slow, selfish, and cautious. 


Aquarius :—Middle stature, hands rough with hair, promi- 
nent neck-bone, large feet and thighs, obliging, active, clever, lov- 
4 


50 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


ing others’ wives, evil disposition, deceitful ; fond of flowers, per- 
fume, friends and travelling ; black mole either on face, arm-pit 
or leg; strong in day time; 3rd, 8th and 13th thithis bad; 
Saturday auspicious ; sufferings from cough ; accident in water ; 
sympathetic member of a secret society; fond of astrology, 
recreation, society, education, science and politics. 


Pisces :—Pale, fleshy, round face, strong body, lofty nose, 
selfish, fond of other sex, subject to cough, simple, a nice speaker, 
learned, fickle-minded, easily discouraged or depressed, Thursday 
auspicious and Wednesday inauspicious, hidden treasures, deal- 
ings in property obtained from sea favourable. 


CHAPTER XIV 
EFFECTS OF CERTAIN PLANETARY COMBINATIONS 


There are certain horoscopes which would prima facie appear 
to be very good, the important planets being located in exaltation 
signs etc., but in reality the native would lead a very ordinary 
life. Conversely, some persons having planetary positions in dep- 
ression signs etc. rise to eminence despite the weak positions of 
planets. The reason for such an opposing influence is due to the 
fact that the good or bad effects as they appear in the horoscope 
are negatived by certain planetary combinations or positions. A 
study of these positions is therefore of prime importance before 
the predictions are given on the basis of ordinary planetary posi- 
tions. These positions are also.called Yogas and these yogas will 
determine the status of the natives’ There are numerous such 
yogas, of which the most important and frequently observed ones 
are given in this chapter. 


If the lords of the 3rd, 4th and 5th houses join together in 
the 4th house, while Venus is with the lord of Lagna, Rajayoga 
is caused. If the lord of the 10th house is in the Sth place of 
the Full Moon, Rajayoga is caused, on account of which the 
native will live up to 100 years without fear of troubles from 
enemies. He will have a very enjoyable life. If the lord of 2nd 
house occupies Lagna or 9th, 10th or 11th house from the Moon, 
Rajayoga is caused. If the lord of the 6th house from Lagna 
joins the 12th place from the Moon there is similar yoga. If 
the lord of the sign occupied by Venus is in Vrishaba, which 
happens to be a kendrasthana from the Moon, Rajayoga is caused. 
Tf the lord of the sign occupied by a depressed planet is at 
a kendra place from the Moon, the evil effects of depression are 
not only nullified but Neechabanga Rajayoga is caused. If the 
lord of the sign occupied by a depressed planet is in exaltation 
or own house there is similar yoga. If the planet that would 
be exalted in the depressed sign occupies a quadrant from the 
Moon similar yoga is caused. A person born in this yoga will 


’ 


52 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


be prosperous, affluent and favoured by the government. It is 
not meant that a person having a Rajayoga will become a king 
but he will become eminent and very affluent. If the lords of 
9th and 10th houses join and occupy a trine or a quadrant, 
Dharma-karmathipathi Rajayoga is caused and a person born 
in this yoga will have conveyances and reputation and will be 
holding a very important post. If a lord of another quadrant 
or trine joins them the effect will be far-reaching but if a lord 
of Nasasthana joins them, there may not be any effect of the 
Rajayoga. 


If Jupiter occupies the 4th, 7th or 10th place from the 
Moon, the position is called Gajakesari Yoga. A man born under 
this will be wealthy, renowned, capable, happy and scientific. 
But he will be vain. If Jupiter is in a Nasasthana from the Moon, 
such a yoga is called Chakata Yoga. But if Jupiter happens to 
be at a quadrant or a trine to the Ascendant at the same time 
there will be no effect of Chakata Yoga. Born in this yoga, the 
native will be prosperous for Some time and miserable for some 
time and the cycle of fortune will be rotating. If the lords of 
the Ascendant and 9th house..are:powerful and occupy quad- 
rants or trines in exaltation Lakshmi Yoga is caused. Born under 
this, the native will be very happy, hospitable, wealthy, learned 
and favoured by the government. If the lords of any two signs 
exchange their places, the position is called Parivarthana Yoga. 
For example, Mercury in Kataka and the Moon in Mithuna will 
be Parivarthana Yoga. If there is an exchange of places between 
lords of trines and quadrants, the effects will be very good but 
if a lord of a Nasasthana exchanges, the person will be rude, 
notorious, quarrelsome and obstructive. If any planet is dep- 
ressed in the 3rd, 4th, 9th, 10th or 11 house from Lagna, the 
native will become affluent and eminent. If the Sun and Mer- 
cury combine and occupy Ist, 4th, 7th, 8th or 12 house, the 
native will be rich and will have governmental favours. 


If the lord of Lagna and that of the Moon’s rasi join a 
quadrant, Pushkala Yoga is caused, on account of which, the 
native will be wealthy, kingly, renowned, honourable and fond 
of jewels and costly dresses. If the Moon is in exaltation or 
own house at trines or quadrants having Jupiter’s aspect Gowri 


EFFECTS OF CERTAIN PLANETARY COMBINATIONS 53 


Yoga is caused. Born under this, the native will have a well- 
built and handsome body, high pedigree, governmental favour 
and birth of dutiful sons. If Saturn is in the 2nd house from 
the Moon, Sunabha Yoga is caused on account of which the 
native will have no material paternal property but he will amass 
much on his own exertions and will lead a decent life. If the 
Seven planets excluding the Dragons are in seven houses from 
the Lagna, Vallaki Yoga is caused, on account of which the 
native will shine as a good songster or dramatist but will be poor. 
If they are in the first six houses, Dhama Yoga is caused, on 
account of which the native will be hospitable, charitable and 
helpful to others. If they are in the first five houses, Pasa Yoga 
is caused and the person born under this will be good-natured 
and will earn money by legal and unblamable means. If they are 
in the first four houses, Kethara Yoga is caused and the native 
will be clever, good and pleasing and will have immense lands. 
The planets in three houses cause Soola Yoga, which will cause 
poverty, peevishness, mischievous “tendency and neediness. If 
they are in two houses, Yuga Yoga is caused and the person 
will be learned in sciences,. pessimistic and miserable. If they 
are in one house Gola Yoga’ is caused, on account of which the 
native will be very poor, dull, impudent and dirty. 


If the Ascendant falls in Saturn’s house and the Moon there, 
while Jupiter in the 11th, the native will have Dharidhra Yoga 
and consequently he will be poor. If Jupiter and the Moon join 
in the 2nd or 5th house, Kathiri Yoga is caused and the native 
will have many impediments in his life. If the Moon and Saturn 
join the Ascendant or if there are malefics in the Ascendant, the 
native will always be in want. If the lord of the 8th is stronger 
than that of the 9th, the native will be poor. If Jupiter and 
Mars are in the 4th, while Saturn becomes the lord of the 8th 
from the Waxing Moon, poverty is caused. If the Moon is quad- 
rant to the Sun, Athama Yoga is caused, on account of which 
the native will not be able to enjoy wealth, vehicles, reputation 
and comforts, 


CHAPTER XV 


PRINCIPLES OF WESTERN SYSTEM 
OF ASTROLOGY 


There are two systems of Astrology, namely, Nirayana 
system and Sayana system. The Indian system of astrology is 
called Nirayana system while the Western system of astrology is 
called Sayana. In the Indian system, the starting point of the 
zodiac, namely, the first point of the sign Aries, is taken from 
the mid-point of the group of stars called Aswini. As this zodiac 
is based on the Fixed stars, it is called The Fixed Zodiac. In 
the Western system, the zodiac starts from a variable point called 
Vernal Equinox and hence it is called The Movable Zodiac. 


All planets move round the Sun in an ellipse. The path in 
which a planet moves round-the Sun is called its Orbit. While 
the Earth moves in its orbit,-the Sun appears to move in the 
sky in an imaginary path called’ the Ecliptic. The inclination 
of the Earth is about 23°-27’. The Celestial Equator and Terres- 
trial Equator meet at a point called Vernal Equinox. This Vernal 
Equinox itself is moving slowly at the rate of about 50:27” a 
year and from this point the Western Zodiac starts. The follow- 
ing diagram will explain : 





PRINCIPLES OF WESTERN SYSTEM OF ASTROLOGY .- 55 


On 1st January, 1965, the Western Zodiac was ahead of 
the Indian Zodiac by 23° 21’48”. This is called Ayanamsa. By 
deducting this figure from the longitudes of planets given in the 
Ephemeris, the longitudes of planets by the Indian Zodiac can 
be. arrived at. 


In India, several Panchangas following the Hindu method 
of calculations of planetary positions are being published. In 
the olden days there were eighteen Siddhantas following different 
methods of astronomical calculations. The calculations of most 
of them were very inaccurate and Varahamihira selected only 
five out of them and discussed about them in his Pancha Sid- 
dhantika. He dispensed with Romaka, Paulisa, Visishta and 
Brahma Siddhantas and preferred Surya Siddhanta. According 
to modern science, by the use of precision instruments, the 
figures arrived at by the Surya Siddhanta are also found to be 
inaccurate. For example, the Earth is found to be making one 
full round of the Sun in 365) days 6 hours 9 minutes and 9-3 
seconds, whereas the Surya Siddhanta calculates as 365 days 
6 hours, 12 minutes and 36;56.seconds. In the circumstances, 
the almanac-makers nowadaysadopt’'the figures as given in the 
Ephemeris or Nautical Almanac and deduct the ayanamsa value. 
Regarding the ayanamsa each almanac-maker adopts his own 
value for the reasons best known to him. In spite of differences 
of opinion in the matter, many follow the figure of 23° 21’ 48”. 
For the years subsequent to 1-1-1965 an addition of 50°27” to 
this has to be made for each year. 


Regarding Planets, the Hindu Astrology deals with nine 
planets including Rahu and Kethu. Rahu and Kethu represent 
the Moon’s North and South Nodes and they are not therefore 
really planets. In the Western system, the recently discovered 
planets, namely, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto are also being con- 
sidered. The ancient Hindus knew that there were other invisible 
planets also but they took only the seven principal planets which 
were visible to naked eyes and found to represent the five prin- 
cipal Elements responsible for the natural cyclical movements 
in the sub-lunar world. The Sun represents the soul of every 
living being while the Moon its body and mind, The other five 


56 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


planets represent the five Elements of Earth, Water, Fire, Air 
and Ether. These elements cause movements and transformation 
because of their varying degrees of inter-action. Rahu and Kethu 
cause eccentricity. The three newly discovered planets do not 
represent any of these elements but they have their own peculia- 
rities. Uranus or Herschel causes eccentric or peculiar attitude, 
suddenness, revolution, electricity, telepathy, invention, occultism, 
novel or odd views etc. Neptune is mediumistic, mysterious and 
deceptive. The effects of Pluto are not yet fully discovered. Yet, 
it is associated with the unseen world, house of death and sudden 
eruptions. Since these planets are being considered only as limbs 
and not as organs, they are not considered in the Hindu astrology. 


There are several other differences in the methods of inter- 
pretation between these two systems, which are e outside the a 
of this’ book. 


The scientific method of+finding the correct degree of 
Ascendant for any place in-the world is by using the Table of 
Houses published by Raphael or others. Take the table for the 
latitude of the required place and note the ascending degree for 
the required Siderial Time..This will be the Sayana ascendent 
and from this deduct Ayanamsa to get the Nirayana ascendant. 


For finding out the exact siderial time for the required 
standard time of a day, the procedure is to deduct or add, as 
the case may be, the difference in time between the Standard 
Time and Local Mean Time from the Standard Time in question 
and add the resulting time to the Siderial time of the day as 
noted in the Ephemeris. To this should be added further at 
the rate of 10 seconds per hour for the time in question. 
Against this siderial time, Table of Houses has to be referred 
to for the particular latitude of the place. 


Example: Bangalore — Lat. 12°-59’ and Long. 77°-34’. 
Difference in time between Indian Standard 
Time and Local Mean Time is 20 minutes. 


Date — 5-6-1965 — Siderial Time as per Ephemeris is 
4 Hrs. 53 Mts. 54”, 


PRINCIPLES OF WESTERN SYSTEM OF ASTROLOGY 57 


Required Time — 2-15 p.m. 1 S T. 


The procedure is— 


Siderial Time at Noon of the day. 4-53’-54” 
Required Time 2-15 
Less Difference in time 0-20 
1-55—0 
Add: 10” per hour 
for 1-55’ 0- 9—19 
——— 1-55 -19 
Siderial Time 6-49 -13 
In the Table of Houses — 
Against 6-49-13 Sid. Time — 12°-44’ of Scorpio 
rising 
Less : Ayanamsa 23°-22’ 





19°-22” of Libra. 





This is the Nirayana position of the Ascendant. 


Thus, the Ascendant and other carps of Houses also can 
be calculated from the Table of Houses. 


PART SECOND 
PREDICTIONS 





CHAPTER XVI 
HOW TO MAKE PREDICTIONS 


In the first book we considered the nature and qualities of 
the influencing bodies and the general influences of the Ascen- 
dant, the Sun and the Moon. We shall now enter into the study 
of every house (bhava) which will form the basis of predictions 
about future events of human life: Every bhava commences from 
the Lagna or the Rising Sign-and-there are, as already stated, 
twelve bhavas which cover all the, events of a person’s life. 


The Ascendant is considered to be the most important sign 
as it governs one’s own life. Unless the Lagna is powerful a 
man’s life will not be smooth and happy. In this connection, it 
has to be remembered that even the strength of other bhavas 
is likely to diminish if the lord of Lagna joins a Nasasthana or 
depression. The strength of the Rising Sign, may be gauged by 
the position of the lord of the Lagna, the planetary positions in 
the ascendant and the kind of aspects which the Lagna receives. 
When there are several aspects, the most powerful one has to be 
given prime importance. Similarly, when there are influences of 
several planets, the influence of the most powerful planet will 
dominate. In this connection, the points mentioned under 
* Shudbalas’ should be borne in mind. 


A peculiar thing which we may more often observe in a horos- 
cope is that all the events assigned to a certain bhava will not 
at the same time prove successful, even though the house is very 
strong ; but there will be only mixed results. For example, from 
the Fourth House, we may deduce mother’s position, the native’s 


HOW TO MAKE PREDICTIONS 59 


landed property, comforts, education, etc. Though the bhava is 
powerful, it is possible for the native to enjoy only some of the 
events in a satisfactory manner. He might have had much landed 
property but would have lost his mother soon after his birth or 
would have had good education, etc. without having comforts at 
all. To what is this due? This is due really to the fact that the 
Karaka i.e., the significator of the particular event might have 
been very weak though the house was strong. Taking the above 
case, the lord of Mother, i.e., the Moon, might have been very . 
weak though the fourth house was powerful. Hence he lost his 
mother. Mars, the lord of property, might have had very power- 
ful aspects and hence he had lands. Thus the significators will 
play an important part in the determination of an event. 


Regarding the position of the planets, we usually take the 
position of the planets from the Lagna. The Moon’s Rasi at the 
time of birth is also equally important and hence the position 
from the Rasi should also be observed whenever a deduction is 
made. 


In order to deduce results;°we should at first examine the 
position of the bhava governing the event. If there are planets 
in that house, the nature, strength and quality of the planets 
should be ascertained. A natural benefic owning bad houses or 
having had conjunctions or aspects will be construed as an evil 
planet. Similarly, a natural malefic may be a good planet if it 
has got good adipathya and good conjunction and aspect. Secondly, 
we should find out whether there are benefic or malefic aspects 
to the house in consideration. Thirdly, the lord of the bhava 
should be considered. The conjunction, aspect and the place 
occupied by him will determine the result. Fourthly, the Navamsa 
occupied by the lord of the bhava should be studied. Lastly, the 
nature, strength and position of the Significator of the event 
should be studied. If there are no planets in the bhava or if 
there are no planetary aspects to such a bhava, then the lord of 
the bhava and the lord of the Navamsa sign, where the lord of 
the bhava stays, may have to be looked into. One important thing 
to note is that all these points may have to be determined having 
the Lagna as well as the Rasi as the starting sign. 


60 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


General rules for predicting events 


(1) Each bhava will have beneficial results if benefics, lords 
of trines or quadrants and friendly planets, occupy them. The 
results will be bad if malefics, lords of nasasthanas and enemies 
occupy. Pet, ee 


(2) If the lord of the house joins a nasasthana there won’t 
be beneficial results to the house. If such lord is a natural benefic 
and joins 8th place, the results of the bhava will diminish, but 
if he is a natural malefic, the results will be very evil. If there 
is aspect by a benefic the evil effects will be mitigated and if 
there is aspect by a malefic or an enemy these effects will be 
worse. If an afflicted planet is in a bhava, the results of the 
bhava will be curtailed. 


(3) If the Lord of Lagna joins any planet the latter will 
become powerful and he will also do good. Similarly, the lord 
of Lagna wherever he occupies will)cause profusion to the results 
of the bhava. But if he occupies the nasasthanas of the bhava 
while the lord of the bhava-.is,.weak, the results of the bhava 
will be affected. 


(4) If a planet has one good adipathya and one bad adi- 
pathya and if he occupies his own house, the planet will give 
the results of the bhava occupied by him and not the results of 
the bhava unoccupied by him. For instance, in the case of Virgo, 
if Saturn is in the 5th house, Makara, he will not deny children 
though he owns 6th house. But if he occupies the 6th house 
he will be prone to do the things attributed to the 6th house 
only and he will not be influenced by the ownership of the 
5th house. 


(5) The Lord of Lagna, though a malefic, will give good 
results to the house occupied by him. If he owns two houses 
of which the other is bad (8th or 12th house) and not 6th he 
will have the strength of Lagnathipathya only and will not be 
affected by the bad adipathya. For instance, if Mars becomes 
the lord of Lagna, which is Mesha, (despite the ownership of 
8th house also) he will be inclined to do good wherever he 
occupies, 


HOW TO MAKE PREDICTIONS 61 


(6) If the significator of an event occupies a house which 
signifies. the same event, such event will be affected. Thus if 
Mercury, the lord of education, is in the second house, which 
signifies studies, the education of the native will be affected. 


(7) If an exalted planet aspects another exalted planet, 
the results of exaltation will not be good. 


(8) Mercury will give good or bad results according to the 
nature of the planet conjuncting him. If there is no conjunction, 
‘his results will be based on the strength of the lord of the sign 
occupied by him. The results given by the Dragons will also be 
on similar lines. 


CHAPTER XVII 
FIRST HOUSE 


From the first bhava or the Lagna, the nature and aptitude, 
body and colour, mind and taste, nativity and fame, age and 
strength, memory and will-power, position in and vicissitudes of 
life, health and wealth, conduct and prosperity may be predicted. 


If the Sun remains in the first place the native will have 
conveyances and governmental favour. He will dominate over 
his enemies. He will have a house-hold powerful god, which will 
help him in his life. He will be a short-tempered man, even 
though he is happy. If the Lagna happens to be his exaltation 
sign, he will have good reputation.and prominent eyes but will 
be haughty. It is said that if Meena is Lagna and the Sun there, 
women will be attached to him... If it is Simha Lagna, he will be 
gallant but will be night-blind:“In’Kataka he causes spot on the 
pupil of the eye. 


If the Moon is located in the Ascendant, the native will be 
gentle, provided it is a waxing Moon. If the waning Moon is in 
Lagna the native will be a servant and deaf. If malefics aspect 
the ascendant the native will be indisposed within ten days. If 
the Moon is powerful the person will be fair, good-natured, femi- 
nine in nature, happy in general and will have a cool brain and 
mind. If Kethu or Rahu aspects him the native will be bulky. 
Even if any other watery planet like Venus or Jupiter aspects 
him he will be so. If the Lagna happens to be a watery sign the 
native will be bulky or fleshy. 


If Mars is in the rising sign, indulgence with other women 
may be predicted. The native will be gallant, provided Mars 
happens to be powerful. If he is the lord of the fourth house 
and occupies the ascendant, he will have immense wealth and 
property. His colour will be brown. The constitution will be 
sound. Eyes will be brownish. The native will be peevish. Thus 


FIRST HOUSE 63 


it can be deduced from the strength of Mars and the lord of 
lagna, the nature, colour and character of the native. 


If Mercury occupies the Lagna, the person will be learned 
— here too the strength of Mercury will have to be ascertained. 
If he is the lord of Nasasthana or if he is in his fall, the native 
will be foolish and insane. If he happens to be powerful or if he 
is aspected by powerful benefics, he will be well-versed in mathe- 
matics. Generally, Mercury in lagna causes interesting and intelli- 
gent power of speech. The native will have interest in studies 
and club-life. © - 


Jupiter remaining in the Ascendant causes the native to be 
benevolent, grateful, learned, sane and fair. The stature will be 
rather tall. Life will be smooth, long and reputed. All the people 
will extol him of his meritorious deeds. He will be a deep thinker, 
a good mathematician, a good eater preferably of sweets. The 
outstanding qualities are that the native will be frank and will 
have a feeble but sweet voice. He will be amiable and social. 
He will get the confidence and help of superiors. 


Venus in the Ascendant makes the person fond of sexual 
pleasures. He will be handsome and will have a well-built body. 
He will have an artistic taste. He will be feminine in appearance 
if Venus is strong. If he happens to be the lord of the 4th, 10th 
or 11th house, the native will have conveyances and houses. 


Saturn in the Rising sign causes the person to be secular 
and dull. The native will be unusually tall and will have a short 
life. The nail will be rough and ugly. One outstanding quality 
is that the native will be pessimistic and pensive. He will be a 
task-master. There will be mental anxiety in youth. But if Lagna 
be Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha, Meena or Thula and Saturn there, 
the native will prosper in life and will hold a government appoint- 
ment or will have governmental favours. He will be a Presidency 
or District officer if Saturn is in exaltation or own sign. During 
the middle part of the life the native will have wealth. 


If Rahu is in Lagna the native will be cruel, cunning, peevish 
and hard-hearted. One outstanding effect is that the teeth will 


64 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


be protruded or very prominent. If Rahu is weak the native’s 
body will be frail and lean. The native will be addicted to dis- 
eases and will especially suffer from stomach complaints owing 
to the administration of poisonous drugs. He will be able to 
read others’ mind quickly. He will dress in a tip-top fashion. 
If a benefic aspects him the bad effects will be diminished. 


Kethu causes the person to do bad deeds rather than good. 
The native will dress in a slip-shod manner. He will have inte- 
rest in theology and belief in supernatural powers. He will be 
addicted to diseases and will be ungrateful and talebearing. If a 
benefic aspects him he will be plumpy. If a malefic aspects him 
he will be weak. In Gemini and Virgo, Kethu gives good appear- 
ance and bold nose. One outstanding quality when Kethu is in 
Lagna is that the cheek bones will be prominent and the cheeks 
on both sides will be depressed. 


If the lord of lagna is in. exaltation, own house or in a 
friendly sign while benefics are-in lagna with beneficial aspects, 
the native will have a long life, reputation, and prosperity. If 
the lagna has malefic aspects “and if the lord of lagna joins 
nasasthanas or if he is in depression, inimical signs etc., the 
native will have a short life, fickle-mindedness, poverty and 
unclean body. 


If the Rising sign falls on a Movable sign, the native will 
earn his livelihood in distant places and will be moving; if it 
falls on a Fixed sign, he will be in his native place having a 
sedentary occupation and if it falls on a common sign he will 
be elsewhere for some time and will come back to his native 
place later. 


If the lord of lagna aspects the Ascendant the native will 
have governmental favours, wealth and comforts. If malefics 
aspect, there will be dissatisfaction in life. If the lord of 6th 
aspects he will be subject to fevers etc. ; if the lord of 12th aspects 
there will be expenditure on his account and if that of 8th aspects 
there will be obstacles and accidents. 


If the lord of lagna and that of 3rd house are friendly and in 
trines or quadrants there will be cordiality between the brothers 


FIRST HOUSE 65 


and if they are inimical or in nasasthanas there will be enmity 
between the brothers. Similarly, the relationship between the 
lord of lagna and that of the fourth will tell the cordiality bet- 
ween the native and mother, 7th house about wife, 9th house 
about father and son. 


Complexion 


The complexion of the individual is determined by the most 
powerful of the Lagna, the Moon’s Rasi, and Navamsa Lagna. 
The lords of these signs and the planets occupying these signs will 
have to be taken into consideration. The most powerful planet 
in the horoscope will also affect the compléxion of the native. 
If the planet be Sun or Mars, the person’s colour will be brown ; 
if it be the Moon or Venus it will be white ; if Jupiter, yellow ; 
if Mercury or Kethu, somewhat dark ; and if Saturn or Rahu, 
black. Here too, if Jupiter, Venus, the Moon and Mercury are 
very powerful the person will be ‘very fair but if they happen to 
be weak he will not be so. In cases of malefics if they are well- 
located the person’s colour willbe satisfactory and if they are 
ill-placed it will be displeasing. 


Constitution 


The lagna being a watery sign with benefics there, the native 
will have a stout body. If Lagna Amsathipathi’s halted house’s 
lord is a malefic he will have a weak body. The person will also 
be weak either when the lord of Rising Sign occupies a kendra 
house without strength or if he is in an inimical sign and in 
nasasthanas, or when the lord of Ascendant with that of the 
Moon’s Rasi occupies a weak place. If the Moon, the significator 
of body, is weak and occupies a nasasthana the native will be 
weak. Judgment should be pronounced after taking into conside- 
ration all these points. Lagnathipathi means the lord of lagna 
and Lagna Amsathipathi means the lord of Amsa lagna. 


Character 


The character attributed to the most powerful planet in the 
horoscope will predominate. The nature and character of the 
5 


66 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


planets are as mentioned in the beginning of this chapter. The 
character of the lord of lagna or the lord of Amsa lagna, who- 
ever is stronger, will also be the character of the native. If a 
malefic being the lord of the eighth is in Lagna the native will 
be cruel. The character of the planet occupying the ascendant 
will have to be given prime importance. In determining the cha- 
racter of a native the outstanding quality of the lagna may have 
to be taken into account. When there are no outside influences, 
the qualities of the sign occupied by the Ascendant may be attri- 
buted to the native. 


Sex 


The Birth Chart will show the sex of the native also. If 
the birth takes place on a Sunday and in the first 14 ghatikas, 
the native will be a male, if it takes place in the next 14 ghatikas 
the native will be a female, in the subsequent 14 ghatikas, male 
and so on. On Monday, birth=of a" female child will take place 
in the first 14 ghatikas, then “male child in the next 14 ghatikas 
and so on. On Tuesday, the first will be a male, on Wednesday 
a female, on Thursday a male,.on,Friday a female, and on Satur- 
day a male. 


If the Navamsa lagna falls on a Masculine sign the native 
will be a male but if it falls on a Feminine sign the person will 
be a female. If the Waxing Moon is on the Ascendant the native 
will be a male but if the Waning Moon is on the Ascendant, 
a female. If Saturn is in odd signs from Lagna, birth of a male 
takes place but if he is in even signs birth of a female takes place. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
SECOND HOUSE 


From the second place we can find out the monetary 
affairs of the native ; eyes and observation ; power of speech and 
studies ; imagination and memory; mind and family; gold and 
stone jewels; and knowledge in Shastras. For other events of 
human life that can be deduced from this house, reference should 
be made to Part I. 


The following are the general effects of the planets occu- 
pying the second house with strength : 


The Sun :—The native will know Shastras, will talk well and 
will be rich. He will be very,generous and extravagant. There 
will be pimples on his face. Eyes_will be affected. Adipathya 
strength should also be looked into. A nasasthana adipathya 
will create bad effects. 


The Moon :—The person will have early marriage. He will 
be extravagant, witty, successful in life, rich and scholarly. He 
will have good power of speech and his eyes will be affected. 


Mars :—The native will be short-tempered, antagonistic 
towards wife, fond of ghee, prodigal and will be a tale-bearer. 
If Mars is the lord of a nasasthana he will stammer. He will 
have an early marriage and will be a land-holder. 

Mercury :—He will be a learned man, nice talker, rich and 
will have a peaceful family. He will acquire money by dint of 
his own earning. 

Jupiter :—The native will be learned in Sanskrit or orthodox 
literature, rich, wise and an unoffending talker and a treasurer. 

Venus :—He will speak well with alliteration and reflection 
and will be a poet. He will be fond of sexual pleasures and will 
protect a large family. He will spend money on jewellery, dress 
and females and will have a successful life. He will have interest 
in music and drawings. 


68 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Saturn :—The native will be a dunce ; his wife will have dog- 
bite and sickness ; he will have eye troubles ; education will be 
hindered ; quarrels in the house with women ; monetary troubles 
and worries ; he will have faltering speech ; his teeth will be long 
and ugly ; and he will take food like meat, fish and wine. 


Rahu :—The native will always talk in jest of others, marry 
twice and will have hindrance to education, family life and wealth. 
There will be injury to the eyes. He will be garrulous. If Rahu 
is in bad signs the native will always utter lies. 


Kethu :—He will have taste in poetry and there will be loss 
of money, hindrance to education and unhappy family life. 


Monetary Prospects 


If the lord of the second house occupies the 11th house, 
which is called a place of gains,'when the lord of the 11th house 
occupies at the same time the second house or if both of them 
are at quadrants to each other, the native will be rich and famous. 
If Jupiter occupies the 12th place, .which is a place of expendi- 
ture, while the lord of the second house (house relating to wealth) 
is weak without having any beneficial aspects he will lose money. 
If the lord of the second house is set or depressed he will become 
a great debtor. 


If the lord of the second is with that of the third he will 
have his brother’s money ; if he is with that of the 4th he will 
get his mother’s money; if he is with that of the 5th he will 
have either his son’s wealth or he will have money from specu- 
lation ; if he is with that of the 7th he will have his wife’s money 5 
and if he is with that of the 9th he will have his father’s money. 
If the lord of the second is in the sixth place his wealth will be 
taken away by his enemies. If the lord of the 6th is in the 
second place he will get the wealth of his enemies. A lawyer 
gets money from enemies and a lawyer’s profession may also be 
predicted. Similarly, with regard to the other places we should 
predict. 


If, Jupiter, the lord of wealth, is well-located having bene- 
ficial aspects, the native will be rich. 


SECOND HOUSE 69 


If most of the planets occupy odd signs the native will be 
fortunate and if they occupy even signs unfortunate. If some 
are in odd signs and some in even signs the results will be mixed. 
The yogas mentioned in Part I should be carefully studied and 
applied in determining the magnitude of the native’s wealth. 


The native will get money in the periods of the planets which 
are in the second place or which aspect the second house or 
which conjunct the lord of the second house. If these planets 
are inimical or depressed or aspected by malefics, the native will 
lose money. The lord of the 6th or 12th aspecting this will cause 
loss of money. 


Education 


The second house is the place of studies and education while 
the fourth house is the house of general education. Mercury is 
the lord of education while Jupiter is the lord of intelligence. 
The position of these planets and-houses should be studied care- 
fully to deduce the results. 


If the lord of education, Mercury,..is in the second house, he 
does not favour higher education though the native may have 
general knowledge. 


If the lord of the second house joins a good place there will 
be unobstructive studies and if he joins nasasthanas there will be 
impediments and the studies will be curtailed. Saturn in the 
second causes obstruction to the studies. If the lord of the second 
house joins the Sun, the native will have a general knowledge 
about politics, hygiene etc. If he joins the Moon and the Sun, the 
native will understand physics and chemistry. Mars will indicate 
knowledge in agriculture, machinery, type-writing, electricity etc. 
Jupiter creates interest in religious studies and religious scripts. 
Mercury governs mathematics, astrology, astronomy, accountancy 
etc. The Dragons being retrograde planets create interest in 
unusual subjects or the scripts like Urdu etc., in which the course 
of writing will be right to left. 


A study of the fourth house is also necessary to ascertain 
the knowledge which the native may possess. If it falls on a 


70 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


scientific sign, he wil! be learned. The powerful planets occupy- 
ing the scientific signs will create profot:nd interest in the subject 
indicated by such planet. 


Success in Examinations 


Students will frequently ask whether they will pass in the 
examinations in a particular year or not. Regarding the success 
in examinations, the general positions of Mercury, Jupiter and 
Saturn according to Gschara Method discussed in Part III should 
be found out. Besides, the Udu-dhasa bhukti period should also 
be noted. If the native passes through a favourable period the 
result will be favourable ; if not, unfavourable. If the native 
passes through the period of the planet having connection with 
the 2nd house and 4th house he will have success provided such 
a planet is not afflicted. If the influencing planets are ill-placed 
but are having beneficial aspects, good results may be predicied 
subject to propitiation of the afflicting planets. If there are mixed 
influences, mixed results will have to be predicted. 


Family 


Lord of a nasasthana in the second house causes uneasiness 
in the family life. If the lord of the second house joins a nasa- 
sthana the native will not maintain a family. If there are two 
strong planets in the second, he will maintain two families. Male- 
fics joining the second or the second house’s lord cause family 
unhappiness. Benefics cause family happiness. 


Eyes 


If the Luminaries, Mars or Saturn be in a nasasthana there 
will be eye-troubles. If the Sun or the Moon occupies the 12th 
place there will be troubles in one eye and if both of them occupy 
this place there will be troubles in both the eyes. Similarly, the 
Lights in the second house cause eyes troubles. Saturn’s aspect 
to the second house will also cause eye troubles. 








CHAPTER XIX 
fi THIRD HOUSE 


From the Third House, we can find cut younger brothers and 
sisters, servants and subordinates, royal heip :nd tiuman aids, 
patience and courage, power of hearing and Giseases of the ears, 
gold and silver vessels and jewels of tie ears, songs and dinner, 
age and loan, correspondence and short journeys, neighbours and 
appointments, enjoyment and secrecy. 


For every event concerning this house, the rulers must also 
be taken into consideration. Mars rules younger brothers and 
sisters, the Sun governs employment, Venus rules songs, dinners 
and jewels and Saturn governs servants, loans, etc. If the Third 
House and he Significators have beneficial aspects, beneficial 
results will occur; if they have malefic aspects, malefic results 
will occur; and if they have mixed aspects, mixed results will 
occur, The magnitude of these results will have to be judged 
by the magnitude of the strength» of the planets aspecting or 
occupying the sign. 


The following aze the general influences of the planets in 
the Third House :— 


The Sun :—The native will have misunderstandings with his 
father or he may not be in the place at the time of death of his 
father. He will excite quarrels in the house. He will be in a 
better status than his! father if the lord of Lagna occupies a trine. 
He will be fond of science and fine arts. He will take more 
tiffin than food. He will be ponderous, brave and firm in his views. 


The Moon :—The native will quarrel with his uncle, will be 
a dumb-wise man, plumpy and attached to brethren. He will 
have many short journeys and interest in occult science. 


Mars :—The person will quarrel with his brothers, will have 
danger in travelling by rail, and will be stubborn, rash and 
peevish. He will be fond of dancing girls. 


72 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Mercury :—Cunningness and knowledge in astrology and 
occultism may be predicted if Mercury is in the third. The native 
will be fond of sexual pleasures, curiosities and sweet food. He 
will lead a comfortable life and will talk in a subdued tone. 


Jupiter :—The native will quarrel with his sons and will have 
help from neighbours and brethren. He will take care of his 
health at first and the other things next. 


Venus :—The person will quarrel with his wife. He will be 
timid, fond of milk, poetry and novels. He may have help from 
kinsmen. He will have brothers and will have a jovial nature. 


Saturn :—He will quarrel with subordinates. _ He will take 
food in small quantity. He will have long life, loss of brethren, 
danger or loss in travelling and persevering nature. He will be 
fond of astrology and occult sciences. He will have conveyances 
and riches. 


Dragons :—He will quarrel’ with brothers and neighbours ; 
will be wealthy, brave and peevish ; and will appear to be simple 
but really wealthy. He is accustomed to untimely meals. 


Birth of Brothers 


If the Third House falls in a fruitful sign, if there are bene- 
ficial aspects to the third house and its lord, and if benefics 
occupy the third house, there will be birth of younger brothers 
and sisters. Similar aspects may have to be found out regarding 
the third house from the Moon’s Rasi, and position of Mars may 
have also to be studied. If all of them favour birth, there will be 
immediate birth of brothers. The influence by malefics will deny 
brethren. If there is mixed influence, the results will be mixed, 
that is there will be birth of brethren at first but death subse- 
quently. The stronger the influences of malefics are, the sooner 
will the brethren die. 


If the Third House falls in a feminine sign, if the lord of the 
third occupies a feminine sign, and if there are feminine planets 
in the third house, the native will have sisters. If there is influ- 
ence of masculine sign and masculine planets, he will have 
brothers. 


THIRD HOUSE wi) 


Fifth House, that is the third from the Third House, will 
represent the second younger brother, the third house from the 
Fifth House will be the.place for the third brother and so on. 
Any affliction to these places will indicate the brothers who will 
be afflicted. 


If the Third House favours birth of brethren there may be 
birth in the following periods :— 


(a) In the Dhasa-bhukti periods of the lord of either the 
Third House or that of 7th, 9th or 11th house. 

(b) In the periods of Mars or the planets that occupy the 
Third House or conjunct Mars. 

(c) In the periods of planets who are trine to the lord of 
the third or Mars. 


Number of Brothers 


If the Third House favours, birth of brethren the following 
points should be noted to~-find- out the number of younger 
brothers :— 


(1) Find out the number of planets occupying the third 
places from the Ascendant, Mars and the Third House, so many 
will be the number of brothers and sisters. Of these planets, the 
planet in extreme exaltation will cause the birth of three brothers, 
that in exaltation or own house will cause two and that in a 
friendly sign will cause only one. The planet in depression will 
portend death of brethren soon, while that in an enemy sign will 
favour birth at first, but death subsequently. Strong Masculine 
planets will produce brothers and strong Feminine planets will 
produce sisters. The signs occupied by these planets will have 
also to be considered regarding sex. 


(2) The.second method is to find out the sign in Navamsa 
which Mars or the lord of the third house occupies. The total 
number of signs from Mesha to such a sign will represent the total 
number of brothers. For example, Meena is the Ascendant ; lord 
of the third house is Venus who occupies Mithana in Navamsa. 
Mithuna is the third from Mesha. Hence the native will have 
three brothers. 


74 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


(3) Find out the number of dots in the third places from the 
sign occupied by Mars in Mars’s Ashtagavarga Table (explained 
in Part III) so many will be the number of brothers. The planets 
which give these dots in the Ashtagavarga will indicate the sex. 


Death of brethren 


Find out the degree in which Mars is. Deduct from this 
Rahu’s degree. If Jupiter passes through the resultant rasi or its 
trines, death of brethren may take place. 

If the Birth Chart shows that there will be loss of brethren, 
then there will be such loss in the dhasa-bhukti periods of such 
afflicting planets, or in the period of Mars when he is in debilita- 
tion, or an inimical sign. 

Ear 


Find out where the lord of the third house is in the Rasi 
Diagram. Take the lord of this house. If he occupies the 8th 
house from the Ascendant the mative will suffer from bitter ear 
complaints. 


Third House is concerned with left ear and 11th house with 
right ear. If malefics are'in: these*two houses there will be ear 
complaints. Saturn governs left ear and Jupiter right ear. The 
position of these two planets may have also to be studied. If they 
have the influence of the 6th or 8th house then there may be ear 
complaints. 

Tours and trips 


Short journeys chiefly by rail and buses can be found out by 
the Third House and its lord. If the third house falls in a 
movable sign or if the lord of the third occupies a movable sign, 
the native will have numerous trips. If benefics aspect the third 
house or its lord there will be prosperity in the trips, but if 
malefics aspect there will be danger in them. These trips may 
take place in the dhasa-bhukti periods of the planets occupying or 
aspecting the third house or its lord. 


General 


If malefics are in the third, the native will have wealth but 
no brethren ; if benefics are there, he will have brethren but no 
wealth, 


CHAPTER XX 


FOURTH HOUSE 


From the Fourth House we can predict the life and condition 
of mother, houses and horses, conveyances and comforts, educa- 
tion and relatives, popularity and reputation, guests and hosts, 
merchandise and friendship, inheritance and position at the close 
of life. 


Mercury is the lord of education, Venus is the lord of vehicles 
and houses, the Moon is the lord of mother and Mars is the lord 
of lands. Venus is considered to be the lord of mother for those 
born in day time and Saturn for those born during night, while 
the Moon is the general lord of mother. The position of all 
these planets should also be taken into consideration. 


The following are the general-results of the planets occupying 
the fourth house. 


The Sun :—The native will have inheritance and he will live 
in a leaf-roofed house if the Sun‘has ‘got good adipathya. He will 
have several enemies. He will lose lands if the Sun is not well- 
located but there will be fortune at the close of life. He may 
acquire two houses. ’ 


The Moon :—There will be long life to mother. The native 
will have vehicles ; will build a decent house ; will be fond of 
shifting his residence often and will have fortune in lands and 
agriculture. 


Mars :—Loss of younger brother ; brick house ; quarrel in 
the house ; troubles in the old age ; and a brave heart will result. 


Mercury :—Inclination to study literature ; good name ; fine 
house and vehicles ; help from relatives ; and numerous paternal 
relations will result. 


Jupiter :—There will be riches from government ; good sons, 
vehicles, house, cows, education, happiness and prosperity. 


76 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Venus :—The native will have wealth through wife, convey- 
ances and lands, income from two or more sources, cows and 
good education. 


Saturn :—The native will have a sickly father, unhappy life, 
loss of paternal property, quarrel with relatives, sickly mother, 
trouble on account of conveyances and dog bites. 


Dragons :—The native will be born in a low house and will 
be unhappy with incessant worries. He will not enjoy cows if 
Mars also joins. 


+. 
Mother 


If the lord of the fourth house occupies a Nasasthana and 
if a malefic occupies the Ascendant without being aspected by a 
benefic the native will lose his mother soon. If the Waning Moon 
occupies a Nasasthana in conjunction with a malefic, while a 
malefic is in the fourth the nativeswill lose his mother. If Saturn 
occupies the fourth house aspected by a malefic while the lord 
of the 8th is in depression, he -will lose his mother. Find out 
where the lord of the fourth occupies in the Navamsa chart. Take 
the lord of this house and note the Navamsa occupied by him. 
Then find out where the lord of this navamsa occupies in the 
Rasi Diagram. If he is in Kendra-kona from the Lagna or from 
the Moon in the Rasi Diagram, his mother will have a long life 
and if he is in a Nasasthana she will die soon. 


Note the planets occupying the fourth house from Lagna, 
the Moon, and the fourth of Fourth House from Lagna. Ascer- 
tain the nature of aspects formed on these signs and on their 
lords. Note the strength of the lords of these signs and the 
places occupied by them. If all these influences are satisfactory 
the native’s mother will have a long life, that is she will die after 
the 40th year of the native’s life. If the lord of Lagna is weak 
and that of the 8th is powerful in a quadrant while the influences 
already mentioned are strong the native will predecease his 
mother. If these influences are malefic, the mother will die within 
the native’s 20th year of life. If the influences are mixed, she 
will die in the years between 20 and 40 of the native. After 


FOURTH HOUSE 717 


ascertaining the first, second or third part as above, the following 
influences should be considered so as to find out the exact year 
of death : 


(i) Find out from the Fourth House from the Ascendant 
and Rasi, who the influencing planets are. If the native passes 
through the dhasa-bhukti of these malefic planets or of the planets 
occupying the Nasasthanas, his mother will die. The lords of the 
6th and 8th houses from the Fourth or the planets occupying 
these houses will give the same result. If the lords of the 4th 
and 9th are at Kendra-konas the mother will die at their periods. 


(ii) Find out the place occupied by the lord of the 8th 
from the Fourth in the Rasi Diagram and Navamsa Diagram. 
Similarly, find out the place of the lord of the 12th from the 
Fourth. If Saturn passes through these signs or their trines in 
the Gochara transits, the native’s mother will die. 


(iii) The transits of Saturn-and Jupiter as mentioned under 
the Ashtagavarga Methods mentioned in Part III should also be 
looked into. 


Property 


If the lord of the 4th house is in the 11th house, or if Mars 
is in the 4th or 11th house in Mesha or Vrischika, the native 
will purchase lands during the periods relating to Mars. If the 
lord of marriage, Venus, is in the Fourth with strength or if the 
lord of the fourth is in the 7th, or if the lords of the 4th and 
7th are friends and conjunct, the native will get lands through 
his wife. If the lord of the 4th conjuncts a malefic and occupies 
the 2nd house which is his inimical or depression sign, he will 
lose his lands. If the lord of the 4th joins a nasasthana while 
Mars is afflicted, the native will lose his lands. If an afflicted 
planet remains in the 4th while Mars is in depression or in any 
way afflicted he will have no inheritance. 


If the lord of the 4th joins a Nasasthana aspected by Mars 
or the Sun, the native’s house will be lost. If the lord of the 
4th place is in the 12th he will live in another’s house or in 
a foreign country. The number of houses which a native may 
have in his life-time can be found out from the number of planets 


€ 


78 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


in quadrants with strength. Strength of Venus should also be 
studied regarding house-property. 


Conveyances 


If Venus is in the 4th house having the aspect of a benefic 
the native will have a conveyance. If the lord of the 4th is also 
very powerful he will have carriages and other good vehicles. 
If the lord of the third is powerful while that of the fourth is 
not so, he will have bicycles and other small conveyances. If 
Venus and Mercury are aspected by a benefic planet occupying 
the Fourth House, or if they are in a benefic sign either in the 
Rasi or in the Amsa, he will have good conveyances. The exact 
time when an individual gets his conveyances can be found out 
from the Dhasa-bhukti periods of the planets occupying the 4th 
or aspecting the Fourth or in the period of the lord of the Fourth 
or that of the Significator, viz., Venus. Reference has also to be 
made to the planetary strength) im the 9th and 11th houses. 


Comforts 


If Venus is strong having benéficial aspects or a good posi- 
tion while the fourth house is unafflicted by malefics, the native 
will enjoy a long and comfortable life. If the 9th house is 
aspected by a benefic while the lord of the 2nd occupies a kendra 
sign along with a benefic and if an exalted planet occupies the 
2nd house, he will be a king from birth. If a malefic or Rahu 
is in the 4th house being aspected by another malefic, he will 
have no comforts. If the lord of the 8th is in the Fourth there 
will be worries. 


General Education 


This has been dealt with in the chapter on the Second House. 
The planetary positions in the Fourth should also be considered 
for the general education which a native may have. The periods 
of the planets in the Fourth favour education and in these periods 
the native may have interest in studies. The position of Mercury 
and Jupiter should also be looked into for the general knowledge 
which one may acquire. 


CHAPTER XXI 
FIFTH HOUSE 


From the Fifth House we can find out the native’s children 
and pregnancy, intelligence and speculation, reputation and royal 
favour, relatives and father’s wealth, previous Karma and 
Manthras. 


Jupiter is the lord of children, wealth and intelligence and 
he must be considered for the prediction of these events. The 
procedure to be adopted in determining the strength of the Fifth 
House is to find out at first the strength of the planets occupying 
the Fifth House, the planets aspecting the Fifth, the lord of the 
Fifth and the lord of the Sth place from the Fifth. Then the 
strength of Jupiter, the significator of children, should also be 
considered. The place occupied by.these planets from the Ascen- 
dant and the Rasi should be studied. The results will have to be 
given after studying all these points regarding birth of children. 


The general effects of-the planets in the Fifth House are as 
follows :— 

The Sun :—Large belly ; eye-sore ; birth of sons ; fond of 
pleasures ; extravagant ; sickness to father; and Siva adoration. 

The Moon :—Fond of gambling and extravagant; good 
brain ; only one son; and good-looking wife. 

Mars :—Peevish ; unhealthy ; sickly mother ; danger to off- 
spring ; and loss on account of gambling and speculation. 

Mercury :—Fond of decent dresses ; addicted to back-biting ; 
adoration of Vishnu; and premature loss of children if the 5th 
is his own. 

Jupiter :—Intelligent ; employment in government service ; 
gains through sons ; profits in speculation, betting etc.; a few 
sons ; and no maternal uncle. 

Venus :—Wealthy > educated ; governmental favours; and 
fond of sexual union. 


80 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Saturn :—Premature loss of children ; a dunce and a thief ; 
and gains if aspected by a benefic. 


Dragons :—Many wives ; loss of children ; the first born 
child will be a female ; wealth and lands ; and travels in a foreign 
country if aspected by the Sun. 


The outstanding quality of Rahu in the Sth is that the native 
will talk with a nasal sound and will have stomach complaints. 


Children 


If the lord of the Fifth House joins the Full Moon or Venus 
without being aspected by a malefic he will have many sons. If 
they are aspected by Mars he will have no offspring. If the lord 
of the 5th house occupies a kendraconasthana without being 
afflicted by a malefic, he will have off-spring even in the prime 
of his life. If either the Sth house or its lord is afflicted by either 
Rahu or Kethu, the native’s off-spring will perish on account of 
Serpent’s curse. If a benefic aspeetsysthe native may beget child- 
ren after performing Sarpasanthi (propitiation to the Snake-king). 
If the lord of the Sth joins..Dhusthanas or if the lord of a 
Dhusthana is in the 5th house’ there will be loss of children. 
If the lord of the 5th is in a kendra or cona with strength the 
native may have seven or nine children. If he is with the lord 
of the sign occupied by him there may be five or seven children. 
If he is in the Ascendant or in the 2nd house, he may beget 
children within the age of 18 to 21. If he is in the 3rd house 
he will have children only in his 25th year or afterwards. If 
the 5th house falls on a fruitful sign there will be children, but 
if it falls on a barren sign there will be sterility. 


If the lord of the Fifth House conjuncts the Waning Moon, 
Mercury or Saturn there will be sterility. If Saturn aspects the 
lord of the Fifth House there will also be sterility. Unless Mrithyu 
Mahamanthara Japa is done 4 lakhs of times, there may be no 
birth of a child. Saturn and Mercury are eunuchs and their influ- 
ence on the Fifth House or its lord will deny children. Mars 
and Rahu will cause loss or abortions. A benefic on the Fifth 


or ae beneficial aspect on the Fifth House or its lord will favour 
birth. 


FIFTH HOUSE 81 


If Jupiter is weak in Lagna or 7th house having the owner- 
ship of 5th house, the native will have no off-spring. If the lord 
of the 5th is alone in Mercury’s house there will be no children. 
If the lord of the 5th is in depression or an inimical sign or with 
the lords of Nasasthanas without having any beneficial aspect 
there will be no children. If Saturn is in the 7th there may not 
be child-birth within the 7th year of nuptials. If the lord of the 
5th house is either with Rahu or in the 10th place there will be 
no off-spring. 

The number of children which a person will have can be 
deduced from the total number of planets occupying or aspect- 
ing the Sth places from Lagna, Rasi and Jupiter. Of these, the 
powerful planets only will give life. An exalted planet will treble 
the number, the planet in own sign will double the number and 
rest will give only one each. The number of children may also 
be predicted from the dots in the Sth house from the Lagna or 
Jupiter, whichever is stronger, in the Ashtagavarga of Jupiter 
discussed in Part III. 


If many planets occupy masculine signs or if the lord of 
the Fifth House is a masculine~planet, or if a masculine planet 
occupies the 5th house, we can predict that most of the children 
will be males ; and if they are in feminine signs female children 
will be born. 


If the Fifth House or its lord has beneficial strong aspects 
there will be immediate birth of children. The Dhasa-bhukti 
periods of these influencing planets will favour birth of children. 
The bhukti period of the lord of the Sth, 7th or 9th will also 
favour birth. In Gochara if Jupiter transits Sth, 7th or 9th house 
there will be birth. Loss of children will have to be predicted 
in the periods of the afflicting planets. 


Intelligence 


If the 5th house has beneficial aspects or if the lord of the 
5th is a benefic or if there is a benefic in the Sth house, the 
native will be intelligent. If Jupiter is strong in a good place, 
he will be intelligent. A malefic in the Sth and a malefic aspect 
on the 5th house and a weak Jupiter will make the native unwise _ 
and stupid. 

6 


CHAPTER XXII 


SIXTH HOUSE 


From the Sixth House diseases, enemies, injuries, affliction, 
attachment to or hatred by maternal relatives, loss of money, 
intimidation, calamities through women, suits, debts, accidents, 
bail, maternal uncles, cousins, servants and inferiors may be 
predicted. 


The following are the general effects of the planets in the 
Sixth House : 


The Sun :—Wound on the head, reputation, governmental 
help and domination over enemies will result. If he is in a Fixed 
sign, bronchitis, asthma, heart troubles, etc. may be predicted ; 
if in a Common sign, consumption.etc. ; and in a Movable sign, 
nervousness, giddiness, rheumatism and liver complaints may be 
predicted. 


The Moon :—The native will lead a miserable life, will have 
two wives, will be bred up by a step-mother and will have govern- 
mental favour. There will be skin diseases. If the Moon is in a 
Fixed sign, bronchitis ; if in a Movable sign, stomach and ner- 
vous complaints ; and if in a Common sign, lung diseases are 
caused. 


Mars :—The native will have a short but happy life, worry 
through enemies and triumph in undertakings. He will always 
talk in a commanding tone and will be a disciplinarian. His 
servants will prove treacherous. In Cardinal signs, Mars causes 
scalds, burns, diseases of the kidneys, fevers etc ; in Fixed signs, 
tonsils, stone, heart diseases ; and in Common signs, lung troubles 
_and consumption. 


Mercury :—The native will have deceitful and troublesome 
servants. His education will be spoiled. There will be loss of 
money and sickness to mother. If Mercury happens to be the 
lord of the Ascendant and occupies the 6th, the native will suffer 


SIXTH HOUSE 83 


from consumption and windy complaints. Ordinarily Mercury 
causes windy and nervous complaints. 


Jupiter :—The native will have faithful servants and _ his 
general health will be good. He will dominate over his enemies. 
If afflicted Jupiter causes enlargement of organs, waste of sugar 
and albumen, blood-poisoning and apoplexy. 


Venus :—The native will indulge in sexual pleasures ; his 
servants will be dutiful ; and his wife will suffer from some ill- 
ness or other. If Venus is afflicted and occupies the sixth place, 
the native may suffer from leprosy, if not the general health will 
be good. 


Saturn :—The person will have debts and wounds, loss of 
money through thieves and will have governmental favours. 
Saturn in the Sixth causes rheumatism, weak chest and stomach 
if in the Movable signs. If he is in a Common sign and in the 
Sixth place, consumption, asthma, cancer and bowel complaints 
are caused. In Fixed signs, he-causes heart diseases, bronchitis, 
and tonsils. An outstanding quality of Saturn being in the Sixth 
is that the native will like greens immensely. 


Dragons :—The native will have a defective limb and will 
quarrel with women. 


Diseases 


Any planet in the Sixth House causes some disease or other, 
but if a benefic is there having the ownership of trines no disease 
is caused. If a malefic or if a planet having a bad adipathya is in 
the Sixth, the native will suffer from the ailment denoted by such 
an afflicting planet. Regarding the nature of the disease reference 
may be made to the disease mentioned in the opening paragraphs 
of this chapter. The Sun will cause fevers and other heat 
complaints, Mars will cause bloody and bilious complaints besides 
cuts, burns etc., Mercury nervous or windy complaints, Jupiter 
blood-poisoning and swellings, Venus watery complaints_ and dis- 
ease in the sexual organ, Saturn chronic nervous complaints, the 
Moon watery complaints like cold, bronchitis etc., and the Dra- 
gons small-pox and poisonous diseases. If two or more malefics 
join in any house the native will suffer from a disease for some 


84 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


time or other. The part of the body affected will be that indi- 
cated by the house occupied by them. Thus, if they are in the 
Lagna, the head will be affected and so on. If the lord of the 
Sixth house joins a malefic or a lord of a Dhusthana, the native 
will suffer from diseases and the nature of the disease will be as 
indicated by the afflicting planet. If the native is born in a Fiery 
sign he will be able to resist the ailment since he will have a 
good vitality. But if he is born in a watery sign he will be an 
easy prey to diseases because of his poor vitality and low resist- 
ing power. If the lord of the Ascendant occupies a good place 
with strength the native will be able to resist the diseases but if 
he is in a Dhusthana he will be susceptible to frequent ailments. — 
In the Dhasa-bhukti periods of the afflicting planets, the native 
will have the complaints or in the years of evil transits in Gochara. 


Minor accidents 


If the lord of the Sixth and.that of the Ascendant are with 
the Sun, the native will haye févér accident ; if they are with 
the Moon, drowning accident, cholera or colds ; if they are with 
Mars, danger from weapons, cutaneous eruptions, small-pox etc. ; 
if with Mercury, bilious complaints, vomiting and distaste for 
food ; if with Venus, danger from a woman; if with Saturn, 
danger from thieves, indigestion, irregular motions, nervous com- 
plaints etc. ; and if with the Dragons danger from venoms, thieves, 
fire and windy complaints. 


If the lord of the Sixth combines with Rahu and Saturn, the 
native will have danger from quadrupeds. 


Forgery and Robbery 


If the lord of the Sixth conjoins the Sun, Rahu or Kethu 
the native will become a litigant and a thief. If the Sixth House’s 
lord occupies Mesha or Vrischika the native will have a stealing 
habit. Rahu or Kethu in the Sixth aspected by a malefic will 
trend the native to be a forgerer. If the lord of the Sixth occupies 
a cruel Navamsa, the native will be a perjurer. If the lord of 
the Ascendant is very strong and if he is a benefic the vile habits 
will be modified to some extent, but if he is a malefic and afflicted 
they will augment. 


CHAPTER XXIII 
SEVENTH HOUSE 


This house denotes love and matrimony, wife or husband, 
public enemies and law suits, partnership and trade, travels and 
happiness, sons and daughters of the second wife, son-in-law and 
relatives, ways and means and merchandise. 


Venus is the lord of Marriage and he should be consulted 
with regard to love and matrimony. 


The following are the effects of the planets occupying the 
Seventh House :— 


The Sun :—The native’s wife will be peevish ; marriage will 
be celebrated on a grand scale ; and wealth through women may 
be predicted. 


The Moon :—There will be. success in marriage, law-suits or 
partnership businesses. The native is a careful spouse. His wife 
will be sickly and he may ‘have two wives. 

Mars :—The native will have many brothers. He will suffer 
from tuberculosis. His wife will be immoral and will die soon. 
He will suffer from weak stomach. He will have an unfortunate 
marriage and probably there may be separation of wife. Constant 
quarrels and loss in law-suits will result. In female horoscopes, 
this position causes immorality. 

Mercury :—Troubles in business, rich dowry, handsome 
sons and horses and a good wife capable of talking well may be 
predicted. 

Jupiter :—Early marriage, good education, success in busi- 
ness, happiness in marriage with a virtuous wife will have to be 
predicted. 

Venus :—Wife will be fond of sexual union. He will have 
success in business, happy marriage and good reputation. He will 
indulge with other women, 


86 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Saturn :—There will be two marriages. The native will be 
living in another’s house. He will have ear ache. His wife will 
be secular and morose. Difficulty in marriage or in married life 
may be predicted. 


Dragons :—The native will have two wives and urinary 
diseases. f 


¥ 


Wife’s character 


The character of the wife may be predicted from the nature 
of the planet occupying the seventh house or by the lord of the 
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 7th or by the lord of the 
Navamsa occupied by Venus. If the planet is a benefic and has 
beneficial aspects the character of the wife will be satisfactory 
but if he joins a malefic or has malefic aspects it will be unsatis- 
factory. If the lord of the 7th has beneficial aspects and 
beneficial conjunctions the native’s wife will be polite and good. 


If the Sun becomes the~ lord of the 7th house and has 
beneficial conjunction, aspectsand position, the wife will be 
dutiful despite the Sun being a natural malefic. 


If the lord of the seventh is Mars and occupies a depression 
sign, inimical sign, combustion etc., his wife will be cruel. 
But if he is well-located and powerful his wife will be agreeable 
and devoted to husband but she will have bad nature. 


If the Moon happens to be the lord of the 7th and conjuncts 
a malefic or is aspected by an evil planet, his wife will be crooked 
and cruel-hearted in spite of the fact that the Moon is a natural 
benefic. =, 


If the lord of the 7th is Mercury and conjoins a malefic or 
occupies an inimical sign, depression, combustion, nasasthana or 
is between two malefics, the native’s wife will be a murderer of 
her husband and there will be destruction to family. 


If Jupiter happens to be the lord of the 7th and is powerful 
his wife will be virtuous, religious, charitable and devoted to her 
husband. She will also bring forth good children. 


SEVENTH HOUSE 87 


If Venus being the lord of the 7th is powerful his wife 
will be eloquent, good and blessed with children. If he is weak 
she will be cruel-hearted and immoral. She will have a tendency 
to steal. 


If Saturn being the lord of the 7th is powerless the wife will 
be adulterous and will bring disgrace to the family. If he is 
powerful she will be chaste, good-tempered and courteous. If he 
is aspected by Jupiter she will be religious. 


If one of the Dragons is in the 7th and has malefic aspects, 
the wife will be mean. If he occupies a cruel Amsa she will be 
cruel and miserable. 


If the Seventh House falls in the signs of Mars and if Mars 
is not located, the chastity of the native’s wife will be highly 
doubtful. 


Direction of Wife’s. native place 


If the lord of the 7th ‘house; from Venus is in the Eastern 
sign the native will get a wife.from. the East of his place of birth, 
if in the Western sign from the West and so on. The direction 
may also be found from the lord of the 7th himself. If the lord is 
the Sun, the direction will be East, if Venus South-East, if Mars 
South and so on. The planetary influences on the 7th house from 
the Ascendant and the Rasi may have to be studied with regard 
to the determination of the direction and the influence of the 
most powerful planet will dominate. 


Status 


If the lord of the 7th house is less powerful than that of the 
Rising sign and joins an inimical sign or in depression or combus- 
tion either in the Navamsa or Rasi Diagram, the status of the 
native’s father-in-law will be lower than that of the native. If the 
lord of the 7th is more powerful than that of the Ascendant and 
has good positions such as exaltation etc. the status of the wife will 
be higher. If the lord of the 7th is a friend of the lord of Lagna, 
the relationship between the native and his wife will be cordial. 
If the Moon in the Native’s horoscope and that in the wife’s horo- 


88 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


scope are in trines and quadrants there will be cordiality but if 
they are in nasasthanas of each other there will always be hitch. 


Marriage 


If the Seventh House has beneficial aspects and conjunctions, 
if the lord of the 7th occupies a good place like a quadrant or a 
trine, and if Venus is powerful with beneficial aspects and con- 
junctions, the native will have very early marriage and will be 
happy. If the Seventh House has malefic aspects, if the lord of 
the 7th joins a dhusthana and if Venus is powerless there will 
be delay and hindrances to marriage. 


The aspect of Saturn on the 7th house or its lord will delay 
the marriage. 


The marriage of the native may take place in the periods of 
the following planets but discretion should be used to fix the 
period :— 


(i) In the Dhasa-bhukti of the lord of the 7th from Lagna, 
the Moon and Venus; 


(ii) In the periods of the planets occupying the 7th from 
Lagna, the Moon and Venus. 


(iii) In the periods of the planets aspecting the 7th house 
or its lord from the Ascendant, the Rasi and Venus. 


(iv) If Jupiter passes in Gochara (dealt with in Part III) 
through the 2nd, Sth, 7th, 9th or 11th house from the 
Rasi, there will be marriage. 


(v) For those born when the Sun was in Northern Hemis- 
phere (Uttarayana) the transit of Jupiter through the 
sign occupied by him in the Navamsa Chart or through 
its triangular signs, will cause marriage. 


(vi 


— 


For those born when the Sun was in Southern Hemi- 
sphere (Dakshinayana) the transit of Jupiter through 
the sign occupied by Venus in the Navamsa Chart or 
through its triangular signs will cause marriage, 


SEVENTH HOUSE 89 


Regarding items (v) and (vi), the transit of the Sun on these 
signs will also favour marriage provided he receives Jupiter’s 
aspect at the same time. The Sun’s transit will show the month 
in which the marriage may take place. 


Two marriages 


The Seventh House falling in an evil sign, the lord of the 7th 
occuping a depression sign or a malefic joining the 7th house, 
will cause two marriages to the native. But a benefic aspect will 
avert this. A weak benefic aspect will cause the death of the wife, 
after some years from the year of marriage. If the lord of wife, 
Venus, joins a malefic and occupies his depression sign either in 
the Rasi Diagram or Navamsa Diagram or is aspected by another 
malefic, he will have two marriages. 


Tf the lord of the 6th or 8th house is in the 7th, the native 
will lose his wife. If Venus and lord of 7th are in Common signs 
in the Birth Chart and Navanisa Chart, there may be two wives. 
If the lord of the Seventh occupies’a Fixed sign there will be only 
one wife. If there are two-planets.in the 7th house or if any 
other planet combines the lord of the 7th or Venus, there may be 
two wives. If the 7th house falls on a bi-corporal sign or if the 
lord of the 7th joins a bi-corporal sign there may be two 
marriages. 


Wife’s death may be predicted in the Dhasa-bhukti periods 
of the lord of the Eighth from the Seventh house from the Ascen- 
dant, the Moon and Venus. There may be death also in the 
periods of the planets that afflict the 7th house or its lord. The 
greater the evil influence is, the sooner the native’s wife will die. 


' Denial of Marriage 


If the lord of the Rising Sign and that of the 7th combine in 
the Nasasthanas, the native will have no marriage at all. If 
Saturn is in Vrischika or if the Moon is there in aspect to Saturn, 
he will have no marriage. If the Moon or Venus occupies 
Makara in aspect to Saturn from a Nasasthana there may be no 


90 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


marriage. Regarding females, the position of the Sun is to be 
considered instead of the Moon. 


Sexual Hunting 


If the Fourth House is occupied by the lord of the Second, 
Seventh or Tenth House, the native will hunt after other women. 
The conjunction of Rahu or Kethu with the lord of the Seventh 
or a malefic aspecting the latter will make the native immoral. If 
weak Moon joins a malefic in the Seventh House, he will corrupt 
a married woman. If Venus combines Mars or Rahu or if he 
is aspected by them, he will have illegal connections. 


The Sun in the Seventh House causes connection with barren 
women ; the Moon with servile women; Mars with the menses 
women or barren women ; Jupiter with decent women; Venus 
with pregnant women ; and Saturn, Rahu or Kethu with menses 
or mean women or widows. 


CHAPTER XXIV 
EIGHTH HOUSE 


From the Eighth House we can predict the death, chronic 
diseases, loss of money, extravagance, suits and quarrels, wills and 
legacies, and dowries. 


Saturn is the Lord of Death and he should be consulted. The 
Sun is the lord of vitality and the Moon the lord of body. If the 
Luminaries are afflicted by Saturn, death is caused. Rahu and 
Gulikan are also enemies of the Lights and due reference has to 
be made also to the affliction caused by these influencing bodies. 


The following are the general effects of the planets in the 
Eighth House. 


The Sun :—The native will suffer from Tuberculosis. He 
will have eye diseases and will bevirreligious and will have death 
on account of heat, fever;.bile..or »weapons. 


The Moon :—Short life, mother’s early death and eye dis- 
eases may be predicted. The native’s death will be on account of 
diabetes, vomiting or tuberculosis. 


Mars :—Death by weapons, blood-pressure, extravagance 
and debauchery may be caused. There may be wealth in the latter 
part of life. 

Mercury :—There may be drowning accident, death on 
account of other’s cruelty, anaemia or hysteria. The native will 
have only a few offspring but he may be a good judge and may 
have reputation. 

Jupiter :—The native will suffer from dysentry or asthma. 
He will have a stout body and long life. 

Venus :—The native will die on account of the cruelty of 
a woman or venereal disease. He will be debaucherous and will 
have a rich dowry. 


92 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Saturn :—Long life, loss of appointment, sexual indulgence, 
peevishness and poverty may be caused. The native will suffer 
from piles and may die on account of windy complaints or some 
chronic diseases. There may be a good appetite. 


The Dragons :—The native will have death on account of 
poison, chest-pain, leprosy, hysteria or small-pox. Kethu will 
inflict unnatural death or scorpion-bite while Rahu will cause 
sudden and unexpected death. 


Death 


From the Eighth House one can deduce the cause of death of 
-an individual. The diseases at the time of death may be diagnosed 
by the nature of the sign on which the Eighth House falls or by 
the nature of the afflicting planet in the Eighth House. The plane- 
tary aspect to the Eighth House should also be examined. About 
the diseases caused by the various planets reference may be made 
to the chapter on ‘Sixth House’Besides the planetary influ- 
ences the following effects of-the-signs may be observed : 


Fixed Signs :—Heart failure; bronchitis, stone, spinal com- 
plaints or suffocation. 


Movable Signs :—Colds, rheumatism, cancer, diseases of 
kidneys or liver and stomach complaints. 


Common Signs :—Diabetes, consumption, asthma and bowel 
complaints. 


If the afflicted planets are in the Eighth House and are 
influenced by Mars or Kethu, the death may be sudden and the 
nature of death will be as follows according to the sign occupied 
by them :— 


Cardinal Signs :—Notorious death like murder, fire, railway, 
lighting etc. 


Fixed Signs :—Drowning, strangling, suffocation ete. 


Common Signs :—Suicide, ship-wreck, prison etc, 


EIGHTH HOUSE 93 


If Saturn is powerful in a good place the native may have a 
long life. If the lights are not affiicted by the Dragons or any 
other malefic, he will live long. The affliction to Saturn and the 
Lights causes premature death. If the affliction is very strong the 
death may take place even in the prime of life. 


The lord of the Eighth House should not be more powerful 
than that of the Ascendant. If he is so, the native’s life is short. 
If the lord of lagna occupies a quadrant, the life will be full, if he 
is in a Panapara it will be medium and if he is an Apoklima it will 
be short. If the Lord of the Eighth House is in a quadrant, it 
will be short, if he is in a Panapara it will be medium and if he is 
in an Apoklima it will be long. The relationship between the lord 
of the Rising Sign and the Sun and Saturn should also be con- 
sidered. The following influences may also be studied. : 


Lagna in a Cardinal sign while Moon in a Cardinal sign—Full life. 


do. do. Fixed do. —Medium. 
do. do. Common do. —Short. 
do. Fixed do: Common do. —Full. 

do. do. Cardinal do. —Medium. 
do. do. Fixed do. —Poor 

do. Common do. Fixed do. —Full. 

do. do. Common do. —Middle. 
do. do. Movable do. —Poor 


After studying all the aspects mentioned above, one can 
ascertain whether the native will die in the first part of his life or 
in the middle part or in the last part. If the individual passes 
through a bad Dhasa-bhukti period or a bad transit during such 

‘part, he will die. Death may take place in the periods of the 
afflicting planet which occupies or aspects the Eighth House or in 
the period of the lord of the eighth or in the period of the lord of 
the sign in the Navamsa Chart occupied by the lord of the eighth. 
For those born in Movable signs, the dhasa of the lord of the 11th 
and bhukti of the lord of Lagna may cause death ; for those born 
in Fixed signs, the dhasa of the Second House’s lord and bhukti 
of the Third House’s lord ; and for those born in Common signs 
the dhasa of the Seventh House’s lord and bhukti of the Eighth 
House’s lord may cause death or accidents. These periods are 
called ‘ Marakathipathis’ periods’ and death or accident may be 


94 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


caused during such periods. For those born in Cardinal signs, 
the Dhasa of the eighth house’s lord and bhukti of the 11th house’s 
lord ; for Fixed signs, the dhasa of the 3rd house’s lord and bhukti 
of 2nd house’s lord ; and for Common sings, the dhasa of 8th 
house’s lord and bhukti of 7th house’s lord will be the ‘ Ayushathi- 
pathis’ periods’. Death may occur during these periods also. 


When Saturn passes through the sign occupied by the lord of 
the Eighth, Gulika or Saturn in the Rasi Diagram or Navamsa 
Chart, death may take place. The triangular signs of these places 
may have also similar effect. If Jupiter transits these signs, there 
may be death. But these transits should be taken as a collateral 
basis to the Dhasa bhukti periods which will inflict death. 


If the Eighth house falls in a Moveble sign, the death will be 
in an outside place ; if it falls in a Fixed sign it will be in the 
native’s own place ; and if it falls in a Common sign, it will be in 
a newly constructed house of the-native or in another’s house. 


Infantile Death 


The cause of infantile’ death’ is ‘dtie to the sin committed by 
the parents of the infants. The influence of the parents on the 
child will be till about 14 years and the death which takes place 
within this period is called ‘ Balarishta Dhosha’. If a child 
survives this period, then the influence of the planets according to 
its own horoscope will be exerted. Before this period, the plane- 
tary influence of the parents will have to be given primary 
importance. Hence the rules for the determination of death of 
the person mentioned in this chapter already will apply only when 
the child escapes ‘ Balarishta Dhosha ’. 


The following influences will kill the child in infancy. 


(1) If the child is born either within one hour before the 
Sunrise or one hour after the Sunset, while a malefic occupies the 
Lagna or the last portion of the Navamsa Lagna, it will die in a 
very short time. 


(2) If the Moon, the Sun, Mars and Saturn are in quadrants 
at the time of birth, the child will have an early death. 


EIGHTH HOUSE 95 


(3) If the Moon is in the 6th or 8th while it is aspected 
by a malefic, the child will die in a month. If the Moon is 
aspected by a benefic, the child will die in the 8th year but 
if there is no aspect there may not be any harm to the child. 


(4) If the Moon eclipsed joins the Ascendant with Saturn, 
while Mars is in the 8th, the child and mother will die soon. 


(5) If the Sun eclipsed joins the Ascendant with Mercury 
while Mars is in the 8th, the child and mother will die after 
‘the pangs of an operation. 


(6) Ifa child is born within the first half ghatika of Mesha, 
Simha or Dhanus or in the last half ghatika of Kataka, Vrischika 
or Meena, the child will die soon. 


Widowhood 


For female horoscopes, the Eighth House is the place which 
determines the longevity of ‘the husband while the Third house 
will be the place which will show the length of her own life. 
If the Eighth House is occupied .or,.aspected hy a malefic she 
will attain widowhood early.” If the lord of Eighth occupies a 
bad Navamsa or conjoins a malefic she will attain early widow- 
hood. If there is beneficial aspect she will live long with her 
husband. If such an aspect is by a weak benefic while the 
Eighth House has an evil influence there will be widowhood 
after some time. The postponement of the widowhood is de- 
pendent on the strength of the benevolent aspects on the malefic 
influences on the Eighth House or its lord. Such widowhood 
will happen in the periods of the afflicting planets, and the prin- 
ciples propounded in the case of the death of Mother etc. so 
as to find out whether this will take place in the first part, 
second part or third part of her life, should be followed here also. 


If the Eighth House is occupied by a malefic while the 
Second by a benefic, she will die before her husband. 


CHAPTER XXV 


NINTH HOUSE 


This house denotes father’s position, virtue, meritorious 
deeds, satisfaction of desires, all the happiness which wealth can 
bestow, divine favour and medicine, reputation, charity, govern- 
mental favours, birth of sons, daughters and grandsons, voyages 
and brethren or wife or husband. 


The sun is the significator of father for those born during 
the day time and Saturn is the significator for those born at 
night. Similarly other significators may be found out from 
Part I. The strength of these significators should also be consi- 
dered when determining the strength of this house. 


The following are the general effects of the planets occu- 
pying this house : 


The Sun :—The native will behave foolishly at times. His 
father will be affected a little. He will be firm, honourable, just 
and addicted to back-biting. 


The Moon :—He will be obedient to his elders and parents, 
fond of travelling and sciences, pious, and will lead a happy life. 
He will have gains in trade and will build temples etc. provided 
the Moon is powerful. 


Mars :—He will be healthy but haughty, jealous and stub- 
born. He will be irreligious and will utter falsehoods. His father 
will be unhealthy. 


Mercury :—He will be religious, wealthy, witty and fond of 
travelling. 


Jupiter :—He will be rich, religious, prudent and honour- 
able. There will be success in long journeys. He will have good 
children. His father will live up to a good age. 


NINTH HOUSE 97 


Venus :—He will earn money through sea-borne trade. He 
will be selfish but pious. He will have obedient wife and children. 


Saturn :—His father will be sickly. He will spend money in 
renewing temples etc. He will be reserved, thoughtful and haughty. 
He will be fond of astrology and occultism. There will be danger - 
in travelling on sea. 


Dragons :—His father will have a sudden or foul death. He 
will be poor or irreligious. He will act on his wife’s words. He 
will manage the affairs of a town or a village. Of the Dragons, 
Kethu is likely to do more harm to the father, but the native will 
have religious instincts. 


Jupiter is the lord of comforts, penance and duty. If he is 
strong and benevolent, the native will have comforts and will be 
dutiful to elders. He will have good sons and grand-children. 
If the lord of the Ninth House is strong in Kendrakona while 
the lord of Lagna aspects the- Ascendant, the native will have 
wealth and comforts. If any planet is exalted in the Ninth House 
he will have no cares and anxieties and will appear to be happy. 


Father 


If the lord of the Ninth House is depressed while the Sun 
is badly located, his father will die early. A malefic aspect to the 
Ninth House will cause anxiety to his father. The nature of 
anxiety may be told from the house from which the aspect is 
formed. 


The status of the father will be high if the planet in the 
9th, the lord of Ninth and the Sun are strong. s 


Father’s death may be deduced by the malefic influences on 
the 9th house, its lord and on the Sun or Saturn. The greater 
the affliction of these planets is, the sooner the father will die. 
After judging all the influences, it has to be determined at first 
whether the native’s father will die in the first twenty years, or 
in the next twenty years or in the last twenty years, assuming 
that his father will die within sixty years of the native’s life. Then 
malefic dhasabhukti periods falling on these parts should be noted 


7 


98 _. FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


and then a final judgment should be made. The principles enun- 
ciated for the death of mother may be applied here also. The 
eighth house from the strongest of the lord of the Ninth, the 
Sun and the planets in the Ninth House should be considered 


principally. ; 


CHAPTER XXVI 


TENTH HOUSE 


This house denotes the- native’s avocation and wisdom, 
charity and worship, renown and fortitude, profession and 
appointments, parents’ death and establishment of towns or 
streets in his name. 


The general effects of the planets in the Tenth House are 
as follows : 


The Sun :—The native will worship the Sun. He will have 
success in life and acquisition of wealth. He will be fortunate 
and will be elected to a post of honour. 


The Moon :—He will worship Devi. He will have success © 
in life, help from females and respect from all. He will repair 
tanks, temples.etc. He will be fond of the other sex. 


Mars :—He will adore Subramania. He will be bold, con- 
ceited and quick in judgment.” He will be the head of some 
temples, tanks, etc. 


Mercury :—He will worship Vishnu. He will have profi- 
ciency in literature or he will be a good merchant. He will be 
witty and pious and will talk profusely. 


Jupiter :—The native will adore Siva. He will be learned, 
rich, fond of sexual enjoyment, reputed and capable of finishing 
the work undertaken. He will be the head of a Department. 


Venus :—He will worship Durga. He will be learned, rich, 
renowned and addicted to sexual pleasures. He will have quad- 
rupeds. He will marry a girl of superior status. 

Saturn :—He will worship Sathan or devils. He will have 
success in life at first but will have a sudden disgraceful fall 
later. He will lose his paternal property. He will earn his liveli- 
hood in a very distant place. He will be the chief of a village 
or a circle. 


100 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Dragons :—He will adore the deities Veerabadra and Guru- 
nathar. He will be wealthy and fond of sexual enjoyment and 
travelling. He will get his employment in a distant place. 


If there are benefics in the Tenth House and if the lord of 
this house occupies an exaltation or own sign in a quadrant or 
a trine, the native will be bright and honourable. He will have 
a good reputation and will be charitable. He will have also 
governmental favours and a long life. If the Lord of the Ascen- 
dant occupies the Tenth House, similar effects will be produced. 
If the Sun is in the Tenth, the native will be liked by all; if 
Mars is there, he will be capable of bringing all the difficult 
undertakings to a success ; if benefics are there, he will do good 
things and will be in the good books of the superiors; and if 
Saturn or a Dragon is there, he will do evil things. 


Employment 


The native’s employment willbe on the lines indicated by 
the planet in the Tenth House’ from the Ascendant, the Moon 
or the Sun. If there are planets in all the three places, the 
strongest of them should be. taken... If there are no planets in 
the Tenth, the lord of the sign in the Navamsa Chart occupied 
by the lord of the Tenth House, will indicate the nature of the 
native’s employment. The Ascendant signifies the nature and 
aptitude of the native and the influence on the Ascendant will 
have also to be taken into consideration in determining the nature 
of employment. The most powerful planet in the horoscope will 
also exert its influence on the nature of the employment. The 
following are the effects of the planets influencing the employ- 
ment. 


The Sun :—Professions connected with medicine, water, 
police, executive work, travelling agency, judge, magician, gambl- 
ing, Forest Department, managerial work and if aspected by a 
well-placed Saturn, service in State or Civil Service. 


The Moon :—This planet signifies prosperous merchants or 
manufacturers. If she has malefic aspects the native should not 
start business but should be contented with an employment. 


TENTH HOUSE 101 


Profession connected with lands, water, pearls, salt and Customs 
Department or Fisheries Department, tillers of the soil, washer- 
men, sailors, hotel-keepers, travellers and public at large may 
also be predicted. 


Mars :—Livelihood by uttering falsehoods and settling dis- 
putes (lawyers), soldiers, mechanical engineers, doctors, Agri- 
cultural Department, butchers, carpenters, cooks, photographers, 
dentists and such work as related to fire and tools. 


Mercury :—Writers, accountants, authors, teachers, book- 
sellers and stationers, astrologers, magicians, merchants, messen- 
gers, secretaries and post-men are produced by this planet. 


Jupiter :—This planet causes employment as preceptors, 
teachers, missionaries, lawyers, physicians, auditors, clothiers, 
grocers, councillors, judges and tobacconists. It also causes ser- 
vice in charitable institutions, Banks and in Incometax, Revenue 
and Treasury Departments. 


© 


Venus :—Dealers in wine, ‘dress, perfumery, confectioneries, 
flowers, scents and linen draperies, poets, artists, songsters, drama- 
tists, trade in gold and stones, cars and horses, Building Engi- 
neering Department, and weavers are all ruled by this planet. 


Saturn :—Labourers, coal merchants, dealers in land and 
property, plumbers, trade in iron-ware, sesame oil and wood, 
carpenters, menial works, printers, fancy-goods dealers, and miners 
are all produced by Saturn. 


Rahu :—Intelligent work if well-placed, erratic and cruel if 
ill-placed, research work if well-placed, and works spoiling others 
if ill-placed are caused by this planet. 


Kethu :—Snake charmers, sinful works, gathering of war 
materials, service in war if the lord of the sign occupied by Kethu 
is in a bad sign, and service in the Jail Department if well-placed 
are indicated by this planet. 


The influence of the signs are as follows and they have also 
to be looked into : 


102 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Fiery signs :—Soldiers, fire and hazardous works. 
Earthy signs :—Manual occupations. 
Watery sings :—Occupations connected with fluids like 
brewery, painting, shipping etc. 
Airy signs :—Intellectual and artistic works. 


If Mars occupies a good place from the Sun or from the lord 
of the Tenth, there may be rapid advancement. If the lord of the 
Tenth is in the Sixth place there may be incessant transfers ; if he 
is in the Eighth there may be loss of employment and disgrace ; 
if he is in the Twelfth there may be a change of employment ; 
and if he is in the Third, the employment will not be permanent. 
If the lord of the Tenth or the Sun is afflicted by unfavourable 
Mars, the master and the employee will not agree and there will 
often be troubles. 


The quarter in which theré will be success may be found 
out from the direction attributéd tothe influencing planet or sign. 
Whether success will be in the native place, outside places or in 
both may be found out by the»nature of the sign occupied by 
such a planet, that is Fixed sign indicates native place, Movable 
sign outside place and Common sign both. 


The native may get government service if Mercury is in 
Ascendant while Jupiter is in the 9th. If the lord of Lagna joins 
a quadrant and is aspected by the 2nd or 5th house there may 
be government service. If the lords of the First and Tenth Houses 
are strong and if Saturn aspects at the same time the Tenth House 
or its lord, there may be government service. If the Sun has the 
favourable aspect of Saturn from a good place there may be 
service in the government and this position denotes managers and 
persons having authority and power. 


CHAPTER XXVII 
ELEVENTH HOUSE 


Elder brothers and sisters, gains, vehicles, obstacles, second 
wife, sexual intercourse, friends and hopes may be found out 
from the Eleventh House. 


The following are the general effects of the planets occupy- 
ing this house : 


The Sun :—The native will be brave and renowned. He will 
have faithful friends and will earn money from litigations. 


The Moon :—He will have many good friends, several houses 
and immense gains. He will help others. 


Mars :—He will be gallant. He will acquire lands. If Mars 
is weak he will have bad friends and inveterate enemies. 


Mercury :—If he is powerful the native will have scientific 
friends. He will have decent houses and good education. He will 
sell precious stones. 


Jupiter :—The native will be fond of music. He will get 
money from his father’s brother or from his elder brother or 
sister. He will have servants, children and good friends. 


Saturn :—He will acquire lands. He will shine as a very 
learned man though he has a poor education. He will be in 
government service. 


Dragons :—The native will be very able in discharging his 
official duties. He will be very learned. He will have ear com- 
plaints. If there is Kethu he will gather war materials. 


If either the planet occupying the Eleventh House or the 
lord of the Eleventh is very powerful such as exaltation, friendly 
or own house, beneficial aspects etc., the native will get immense 


104 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


wealth. Depression, evil aspects etc. will cause loss in under- 
takings. 


If the Sun is powerful in the Eleventh, the native will get 
money from his kinsmen or from government; if the Moon is 
powerful, from his mother or her relatives ; if Mars, from his 
brethren ; if Mercury, from friends or literates ; if Jupiter, from 
sons, speculation or charitable institutions; if Wenus, from 
women, dramatic performances, songs or music and if Saturn, 
from sowing seeds and labours. 


If the lord of the Eleventh is in the house of the Sun he 
will get money from the Eastern quarter ; if Venus, from South- 
eastern quarter ; if Mars, South ; if Rahu, South-west ; if Saturn, 
West ; if the Moon, North-west; if Mercury, North; and if 
Jupiter, North-east. 


If the lord of the Third House.is in the Eleventh, the native 
will get his brother’s money 3-if the lord of the 7th is in the 11th, 
wife’s money ; if the lord of the 9th is in the 11th, father’s 
money ; if the lord of the’'6this‘in’the 11th, enemies’ money ; 
and if the lord of the 4th is here, mother’s money. 


Elder brothers and sisters 


The Eleventh House is the house denoting elder brothers 
and sisters. Jupiter is the lord of elder brothers. If there are 
benefic aspects and conjunctions to them there will be happiness 
through the elder brothers. A malefic in the 11th causes des- 
truction to the elder brother. If the lord of Eleventh and Jupiter 
have connections with malefics and remain in the 6th, there will 
be loss. Malefic aspects or position in the 11th, while the lord 
of the Eleventh is in a Nasasthana, deny elder brothers or sisters. 
Beneficial aspects will favour the elder brothers. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 
TWELFTH HOUSE 


From the Twelfth House, expenditure, journeys, residence 
in foreign lands on duty, sound sleep, real happiness, excellent 
beds, gifts, ship business, government appointment, secret ene- 
mies, imprisonment and assault by robbers may be predicted. 

The following are the general effects of the planets occupy- 
ing the Twelfth House : 

The Sun :—The native will have a big belly and eye-sores ; 
he will be hen-pecked and will have cohabitation with a widow. 

The Moon :—He will always be travelling. He will be fond 
of occult science and sensual pleasures. 

Mars :—There will be secret enemies and there is danger 
of imprisonment if Mars is afflicted. If he is aspected by evil 
Saturn there will be injury by-robbers. The native may have 
ear complaints and will be addicted to back-biting. 

Mercury :—The native willbe residing in another’s house. 
He will always be thinking.over, something or other. He will be 
a fluent conversationalist but voice will be inaudible. 

Jupiter :—The native will always be travelling. He will be 
hen-pecked and will be fond of sensual pleasures. 

Saturn :—He will be very strict in his dealings, careful about 
money and able to gain his ends. There is a danger of secret 
poisoning and there will be private enemies. 

Dragons :—The native will not be good-looking. There will 
be loss of children. 

If the lord of the Twelfth is on the Ascendant the native 
will spend money on himself ; if he is in the 3rd, on his brother ; 
if he is in the 4th, on his mother ; if he is in the Sth, on sons 
or speculation ; if he is in the 7th, on his wife ; and if he is in 
the 9th, on his father. 

Beneficial aspects to the Twelfth will cause good expenditure 
on good things, conjugal happiness, sound sleep etc. while malefic 
aspects will cause expenditure on wastes and bad things, im- 
morality and disturbed sleep. 


CHAPTER XXIX 


AN ILLUSTRATIVE HOROSCOPE 


So as to have a clear grasp of the subject let us take an 
illustrative horoscope and apply the points given in the book. 


Male — Born on 22-7-1934, Sunday, Anuradha Star, at 
11-12 am. LS.T. 


Balance at birth — Saturn dasa 10 years 11 months and 









































13 days. 
Mars Lagna 
Mercury ||\Merc. Rees) 
Venus Rahu 
Sun 
Ketu 
Rasi Pecan Navamsa 
oo Mars Sun 
Jupiter 
Moon : aa Ketu | Venus Saturn 
; Pp Moon 




















The native has been born in Virgo Lagna and the outstand- 
ing quality of this sign as stated in Chapter XI is that he is 
shy and he will be having downcast look. As stated, he was 
living in his aunt’s house for some time. Jupiter’s position in 
the Lagna with the lord of Lagna in his own house, Gemini, 
causes a very fair complexion. He is ambitious, charitable and 
very gentle because of Jupiter’s influence. Jupiter has Kendradi- 
pathya dosha and also Badakadipathya dosha. His position in- 
Lagna (self) with the aspect of lord of 8th, Mars, will cause 
impediments and retardation mainly due to his own conduct. 


AN ILLUSTRATIVE HOROSCOPE 107 


Still, the native has other good yogas, namely, Dharma Karmathi- 
pathi yoga (Lord of 9th combining Lord of 10th), Pushkala yoga 
(Lord of Lagna combining Lord of Moon’s Rasi) and other 
sundry yogas. These indicate that he will come up in life late 
after experiencing difficulties, since Mercury has Neecha Amsa 
also, and lord of 8th joining the Dharma Karmathipathis. 


Regarding education, the Lord of 2nd, Venus, is in a good 
place but he combines lord of 8th, Mars. The second house, 
Libra, is aspected by Saturn, a malefic, and the lord of 4th, 
Jupiter, (general education) is being aspected by Mars being lord 
of 8th. These are all obstructive. In fact he stopped his studies 
in the middle and could not graduate himself. The second house 
denotes eyes also. Because of Saturn’s aspect on the 2nd and 
the Sun’s combination with a malefic, he has a severe Myopia. 


Regarding brethren, the Moon, the planet of fecundation, 
is in the 3rd with Neechabanga Raja Yoga. The lord of 3rd, 
Mars, is in the 10th house with the lords of 9th and 10th and 
hence he will have many younger-brothers. 


Saturn and Rahu in Sth with the aspect of Mars, all being 
malefics, cause impediments to progeny. In fact, the first two 
issues were aborted. There is however the benign aspect of 
Jupiter, and Saturn, the lord of 5th, is in his own house. Because 
of these redeeming features he will have a few children after 
propitiation. Now, he is having one boy. 


The lord of 7th, Jupiter, is aspecting the 7th place giving 
strength to this house. Jupiter’s colour is yellow or a fair com- 
plexion. His wife is therefore fair, good-looking and polite. His 
marriage took place on 30-6-1959 in Mercury dasa, Jupiter 
bhukti. Note that Jupiter is the lord of 7th (marriage) and is 
also the lord of 7th from the significator of marriage, Venus. 
He is also the lord of 7th from the dasa lord, Mercury. Hence, 
this is a strong period for marriage. 


The lord of 9th, Venus, is in a kendra, while the Sun, the 
significator of father, is in 11th. His father is therefore in a 


good position. 


108 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Regarding profession, the lord of 10th, Mercury, though 
powerful in Rasi Chart is depressed in Navamsa. He has con- 
joined not only the lord of 9th, but lord of 8th, Mars. On 
account of this combination, though the native got jobs in Mer- 
cury dasa, he left them twice on his own volition. At the fag 
end of Mercury dasa he was jobless for some time. Later, he 
entered Medical line in several capacities like Sales Representa- 
tive, Distributor etc. In Ketu dasa, he started his own business 
in the manufacture of medicines. He is now progressing. As 
Ketu is in a good position, he will progress in the latter half of 
his dasa. Mercury denotes trade and he has taken up his career 
as a businessman. : 


The native fractured his right knee on 16-6-1963 in Saturn’s 
dasa, Jupiter’s bhukti and Saturn’s sukshama. The lord of 8th, 
Mars, is in the 10th (knees). He is also in the 8th place of the 
Moon (body) and hence he is susceptible to an accident on the 
knee. This has occurred in Saturn’s. sub-period as he is the lord 
of 6th house (accident) in.|the. bhukti of Jupiter, who is a 
badakathipathi and aspected by the lord of 8th in Lagna. 


Several planets like Saturn, Rahu, Sun and Ketu are in 
Movable signs and four planets in Common signs. These show 
that the native will always be moving about. He served in Bom- 
bay and Calcutta for some time and now he is having his busi- 
ness in Madras, which is far away from his place of birth. His 
profession involves much travelling also. 


Thus, all the aspects have got to be studied blending the 
characteristics of the influencing planets, signs and houses. 


PART THIRD 





CHAPTER XXX 
UDU DHASA-BHUKTI CALCULATIONS 


It is believed that the student would have obtained a fair 
knowledge of the prediction of events by a thorough study of the 
earlier parts. The next step for him is to calculate the time of 
occurrence of such events. There are principally three methods, 
Udu-Dhasa bhukti calculations, Gocharapala calculations and 
Ashtagavarga calculations, of which the first method yields a fairly 
satisfactory result and the other two remain subsidiary to the first. 
There are three more methods which are also followed by some 
at times, viz., Kalachakradhasa_ pala calculations, the Western 
Method of Directions and Transits or Solar Returns but these 
are beside the scope of this book. 


The normal duration.of>.a.person’s life is supposed to be 
120 years and this period has been divided into nine dhasas, 
named after the nine planets, and these dhasas are divided into 
bhuktis, which are further divided into antharas and antharan- 
tharas. The commencement of a dhasa at the time of birth is 
based on the asterism in which an individual is born and this 
is therefore called ‘ Nakshatra dhasa calculations’ also. To find 
out what dhasa commences at the time of birth and what portion 
of the commencing dhasa has to be taken into account in cal- 
culating the future events, reference may be made to Part I. 
Supposing that Jupiter’s dhasa commences at the time of birth 
of a person the balance of period noted already will be the period 
during which Jupiter will have his sway over the native and- 
afterwards Saturn will govern the native for 19 years, then Mer- 
cury for 17 years and so on. During the Dhasa period of a 
planet the native will enjoy the results according to the position 
of such a lord in the Birth Chart. Every dhasa is divided into 
bhuktis as already stated and the first bhukti will be that of the 
dhasa lord and the succeeding bhuktis will be in the order given 


110 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


in Part I. The results of each bhukti will be good or bad accord- 
ing to the position of the bhukti-lord in the Birth 
Chart but such bhukti-lord will be only subservient to 
the dhasa-lord. Each bhukti has been divided into antharas 
and the first anthara will be that of the lord of the bhukti. It 
is not necessary to study the anthara periods often and hence 
the calculations and effects of these periods are not being dis- 
cussed in this book. For ordinary purposes, the effect of a bhukti 
in a dhasa is the chief thing that is being considered and the 
predictions according to bhuktis will be very satisfactory. 


The following illustration will be of use in finding out the 
ruling period on a particular date : 


Suppose a person is born on 24th May, 1908 and the ruling 
period on 1st March 1930 may be found out as follows : 


Date of birth 3 .. 24th May, 1908 


Add: Balance of Jupiter’s Dhasa at the 
time of birth—QOut of 16 years, 
15 years 4 months and’7 days only 
remained at birth» inthis case. 
Adding this, the period upto which 
Jupiter ruled the native is os tst Oct 1923 


Then Saturn’s Dhasa lasts for 19 years 
which is divided into bhuktis as 
noted below. 


Saturn’s bhukti in Saturn’s Dhasa— 
Duration 3 years and 3 days. 
Adding this the time upto which 
this bhukti will rule is a Ath (Octs 1926 


Mercury’s bhukti in Saturn’s Dhasa is 
the next in order and its duration 
is 2 years 6 months and 12 days 
which may have to be added. This 
period will rule till .. 16th April, 1929 


Then Kethu’s bhukti for 1 year 1 month 
and 9 days, that is upto « 25th May 1930 


UDU DHASA-BHUKTI CALCULATIONS 111 


The ruling period on 1st March 1930, therefore, is Saturn’s 
Dhasa, Kethu Bhukti. 


Whether a bhukti will be good or bad 


If a person passes through the period of a planet which is 
favourably placed in the Birth Chart he will reap good results 
in that period but if he passes through the period of a planet 
which is unfavourably placed, he will have only miseries during 
such period. Whether a planet is favourably disposed of or 
not has to be found out from the methods propounded already 
in the earlier chapters. That is, the following items may have 
to be scrutinised : 


(i) Essential dignities of a planet, ie., exaltation, own 
house or depression sign etc. occupied by the planet. 

(ii) Accidental dignities that is Kendras, Conas, Upacha- 
yas or Nasasthanas which such a planet occupies. 

(iii) Position of the bhukti-lord from the Dhasa-lord. 

(iv) Position of the bhukti-lord from the Ascendant. 

(v) Position of the bhukti-lord from the Moon’s Rasi. 

(vi) Relationship of the “‘bhukti-lord withthe Dhasa-iord. 


If a planet is in exaltation, vargotham, own house and 
friendly house, bhukti period of this planet will be good. But a 
planet having this strength is prone to cause the events accord- 
ing to his own nature and aptitude. Thus an exalted Venus 
will cause in his bhukti excessive pleasure-seeking, religious 
mindedness, pleasure through women, marriages, neat dresses etc. 
If this planet is weak these events will also be weak. Thus the 
strength on account of Essential dignities will have to be 
examined. 


In respect of Accidental dignities, good results can be pre- 
dicted if the bhukti-lord is trine or quadrant to the Dhasa-lord, 
the Ascendant and the Moon. If he is in the 2nd or 11th 
house, even then the period ‘will be good. Best results could 
be expected if the bhukti lord is well-located from all the three 
places, viz., Dhasa lord, the Ascendant and the Moon. Mode- 
rate results can be expected if the planet is well-placed from only 
two positions. There may be anxieties if he is well placed from 


112 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


only one position. Similarly, bad placement from the three posi- 
tions (i.e., a Nasasthana position) will cause excessive worries 
and evils, while such placement from two positions and one posi- 
tion will be a little less in the effects. 


The chief events that would happen in a period are accord- 
ing to the ownership of houses by the ruling planets, and the 
houses occupied by them will show the result. If the bhukti- 
lord is in a quadrant or a trine, good results of the event can 
be predicted and if he is in a Nasasthana bad results may have 
to be predicted. Thus in a bhukti, if the bhukti-lord owning 
the 4th house occupies 5th place, acquisition of properties, inte- 
rest in studies and healthy and happy environment may be pre- 
dicted. The things governed by such a planet may also be en- 
joyed by the native. If such a lord occupies 8th place, loss of 
property, loss of education and ill-health or loss of mother may 
have to be predicted. 


The feeling which a ‘native will have during a particular 
period is dependent on the relationship between the Dhasa lord 
and the Bhukti-lord. If*bothof:them are friends, the native 
will move in a friendly atmosphere and be happy, but if they are 
enemies he will move in a hostile atmosphere and will be 
unhappy. 


Effects of Adipathya 


A person will enjoy during the Dhasa period the results pro- 
duced by the dhasa-lord according to its ownership of houses. 
The magnitude of these results is dependent on the strength of 
the planet in Accidental and Essential dignities. The follow- 
ing are some of the main results produced by a dhasa-lord or 
a bhukti-lord. 


If the lord of the Ascendant is powerful in the Kendra- 
conas and Upachayas, the native will be happy, healthy and 
reputed in his period. If he is weak and is in a Nasathana, he 
will be unhappy, sickly and worried in his period. He will have , 
a change of place also and will aspire for another’s lot. There 
will be innate fear. 





UDU DHASA-BHUKTI CALCULATIONS 113 


If the lord of the Second House is powerful in Kendraconas 
or Upachayas the native will have family happiness, monetary 
receipts, birth of a child, good and timely meals and capability 
of sound talk etc. in his period. If such a planet is weak and 
is in a Nasasthana, he will have family worries, eye-sore, loss of 
money, foul talks and inclinations to write unwarranted letters. 


If the Lord of the Third House is powerful and joins a good 
place, the native will have brotherly help, command of persons, 
good news, travels (pleasure trips) and courage. If he is in a 
Nasasthana, there will be loss of brethren or worries through 
them, disgrace, troubles from enemies and unpleasant and un- 
necessary trips. - : 


If the Lord of the Fourth is good, the native will get in 
the period vehicles, houses, lands, sexual pleasures and receipts 
from agriculture. If he is in a Nasasthana, he will have loss of 
vehicles, lands, houses, drowning accident and anxieties about 
_ mother. 


If the lord of the Fifth isin a good place, the native will 
have interest in studies, religious-mindedness, prestige and birth 
of a child. If he is in a Nasasthana there will be loss of a child, 
evil thoughts, bad names, evil associations and loss in specula- 
tive undertakings. 


If the Lord of the Sixth joins a good place, the native will 
have during his period monetary receipts, courage, happiness and 
domination over enemies. If he is in a Nasasthana there will be 
fear from thieves, disgrace, fevers, unnecessary travels and incli- 
nation to do menial works. He will have bad associations. 


If the Lord of the Seventh occupies a good place, the native 
will acquire during his period jewels, clothes, and other good 
things. There will be good bed. Marriage may take place. 
There will be happiness in short. If such lord occupies a Nasas- 
thana, there will be separation of wife and the native will have 
disgrace, unhappy travels, diseases in the privy parts and immo- 
ral tendencies. 


If the Lord of the Eighth joins a good place, there may be 
relief from loans and diseases and he may enjoy happiness. If 
8 


114 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


he joins a bad place, there will be misery, melancholy, diseases, 
travels, disgrace and obstruction. Loss of life may have also 
to be predicted according to circumstances. 


The Ninth House’s lord produces in his period good effects 
if he joins a good place. The native may have immense happi- 
ness with his children, good reputation, governmental favours, and 
religious thoughts. Evil positions cause family worries, loss of 
father, quarrels with elders and irreligious thoughts. 


If the lord of the Tenth is in a good place, the native will 
have reputation, employment, unobstructive undertakings, pro- 
fessional gains and general happiness. If he is in a Nasasthana, 
he will have obstruction and misunderstandings in the employ- 
ment, governmental disfavour, travels and worries. 


If the Lord of the Eleventh is in a good place, the native 
will have during his period immense gains, association with 
friends and relatives, comforts by having servants or subordi- 
nates and happiness. If he is-in a Nasasthana, he will have un- 
easiness, loss of money, ear-complaints and misunderstandings 
with elder brother or sister. 


If the Lord of the Twelfth House joins a good place, there 
may be expenditure for good purposes, governmental help, sound 
bed and travels on professional purpose. An evil position causes 
during this planet’s period unnecessary expenditure, travels, 
wotries, governmental disfavours and confinement. 


Effects of Planetary Dignities 


If a planet occupies a good position like exaltation, own- 
sign, moolatricona, vargotham, retrograde or a friendly sign, the 
qualities and nature of such a planet will predominate during his 
period. If he occupies a depression or inimical sign, the effect 
will be unsatisfactory and if he joins a Nasasthana it may b2 
detrimental. The results produced by the planets during their 
periods according to their natural tendencies are as follows : 


The Sun is inclined to cause fevers, travels, anger, eye-sore, 
tooth-ache and loss of money and servants. If there is a bene- 


UDU DHASA-BHUKTI CALCULATIONS 115 


ficial aspect or conjunction beneficial result will occur, if not the 
results will be bad. 


The Moon is inclined to cause mental easiness, acquisition 
of jewels, clothes and lands. There may be governmental favours, 
religious thoughts and travels. The native may have phlegmatic 
conditions. If he is a waning Moon and if he has malefic influ- 
ences, bad things will occur. 


Mars if well-placed, may cause advancement in the employ- 
ment, monetary receipts from enemies, acquisition of lands, 
enjoyment with women, hot and bloody diseases. If ill-placed, 
there may be operation, loss of money, avarice and enjoyment 
with bad women. 


Mercury causes association with friends and relatives, inte- 
rest in studies, happiness in the family, acquisition of lands and 
cattle, religious thoughts, association with learned people, birth 
of a child and windy complaints: As already stated, if he is ill- 
placed, contrary results may, have to be predicted. 


Jupiter causes prestige, birth of children, association with 
religious people, religious ‘thoughts;governmental favours, mone- 
tary receipts, and interest in books and learning. 


Venus causes acquisition of good vehicles, cattle and jewels, 
enjoyment of music, association with poets or musicians, sexual 
pleasures and marriages. Acquisition of house-property may. also 
be predicted. 


Saturn causes governmental disfavours, low company, wife’s 
sickness, separation, agricultural loss, travels and windy diseases 
or nervous debility. 


Rahu inflicts fear from reptiles, thieves, government, fire 
and enemies. There may be a change of place, loss of relation, 
disgrace or scandal and innate fear. If he is in trines or quad- 
rants, there may be reputation and monetary receipts in the 
beginning, but bad results will be acute at the end. 


Kethu causes scandal, fear from thieves, government, wea- 
pons and enemies. There may be travels. The native may have 
worries from relatives, diseases and anxieties about love affairs. 


116 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 
Certain rules for prediction 


(1) All the planets will give bad results in their own bhuktis 
of the same dhasa. Thus Saturn’s bhukti in Saturn’s dhasa will 
be very bad. 


(2) If a planet has got the ownership of the 2nd or 7th 
house, his period will cause death or accident though there may 
be good monetary receipts. 


(3) Mercury will give the results of the planets joining him 
while the Dragons will give the results of the lords of the signs 
occupied by them. 


(4) The bhukti period of a planet owning a Kendra in the 
dhasa-period of a planet owning a Tricona will be very good. 
Similarly, the bhukti-period of a planet owning a Tricona in 
the dhasa-period of a planet owning a Quadrant will be very good. 


(5) The ownership of 3rd;.6th, 8th or 12th house by any 
planet will be bad, but the Lights will not give bad results 
though they own the 8th house. If benefics own Kendra houses, 
good results may not be expected: 


(6) If the lord of Lagna has the ownership of a bad house 
also at the same time, he will give only good results though he 
owns a bad house also. Thus for those born in Vrischika lagna, 
Mars will give good results though he owns the 6th house. 


(7) In the period of Lagnathipathi good results will happen. 
The results of the house occupied by him will increase. 


(8) If the significator of an event occupies a sign which 
signifies the same event, such event will have only a prejudicial 
effect during the significator’s period. 


(9) If Saturn’s dhasa is fourth, Jupiter’s dhasa sixth or 
Rahu’s and Mar’s dhasas fifth, there will be troubles and mise- 
ries in their periods. 

(10) A malefic joining a benefic will be prone to do good 
things in his period while a benefic joining a malefic will be. 
inclined to do bad things in his (benefic’s) period. 


CHAPTER XXXI 


GOCHARA OR PLANETARY TRANSITS 


Besides the Dhasa-bhukti calculations, the planetary posi- 
tions from the Moon’s Rasi each year are also usually considered 
for the calculation of future events. This method is called 
‘Gochara.’ The position of the planets in transits from the sign 
occupied by the Moon at the time of birth (ie., the Rasi) 
exerts some influence on the native during the period when such 
influencing planet occupies a sign in its transits. Instead of study- 
ing the positions from the Ascendant as usual, the positions from 
the Moon’s Rasi have got to be studied in this method. The 
planetary positions for each month are noted in the almanacs and 
by a reference to them one can easily find out whether such 
positions from the Rasi are favourable or unfavourable to him. 
Generally, the Sun takes one. month to leave a sign ; the Moon 
takes 24 days ; Mars 14 months; Mercury 1 month ; Jupiter 1 
year ; Venus 1 month ; Saturn’ 24 ‘years ; and Dragons 1% years. 
Yearly results can be predicted with reference to Saturn, Dragons 
and Jupiter ; monthly results by referring to the movements of 
the Sun, Mars, Mercury and Venus ; and daily results by referring 
to the movement of the Moon. 


If benefics like Jupiter, Mercury and Venus occupy the 1st, 
8th or 12th house from the Rasi, the native will have some harm 
and impediments. If malefics like the Sun, Mars, Rahu or 
Kethu occupy these places, they will do much harm and there 
will be loss. If Saturn occupies these places there will be 
immense harm. All the planets in the 11th house will do good. 
Malefics in the 3rd or 6th place from the Rasi give good results 
and benefics in the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th or 10th house give good 
results, like happiness, promotions, monetary receipts etc. In 
the 3rd or 6th place the results will be indifferent and in the 
Ist, 4th, 8th or 12th place, they will be bad. Malefics occupy- 
ing the 2nd, 3rd, 6th or 11th house give good results. They 


118 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


give bad results when they occupy the Ist, 4th, 8th or 12th 
house. 


With regard to the Dragons, they give the results as given 
by Mars. The Sun and Mars will give their results in the begin- 
ning ; Saturn and Dragons in the end ; and Jupiter and the Moon 
throughout their occupation of a sign. The Sun may give the 
results of the next house since 5 days prior to his transit to the 
subsequent house. Mercury and Venus will give results of the 
next house since 7 days prior to their transit to the subsequent 
house. The period for Mars is 8 days ; for the Moon, 3 ghatikas ; 
for Jupiter 2 months; Dragons 3 months; and Saturn, 6 
months. 


Of all the positions, Saturn in the 1st place, Kethu in the 
2nd, Jupiter in the 3rd, Mercury in the 4th, the Sun in the Sth, 
Venus in the 6th, Mars in the 7th, the Moon in the 8th and Rahu 
in the 9th are powerful and at that time there will be immense 
loss of money, worries and ilIness: 


When Saturn passes the house occupied by the Moon at 
birth and the two adjoining°houses”(in other words, 12th, Ist 
and 2nd houses) there will be immense troubles, worries, quar- 
rels and impediments. This period lasts for seven-and-a-half 
years. During the life of an individual there is a possibility of 
having three courses of the seven-and-a-half years period. In 
the first course the native will suffer immensely, in the second 
he may have many enjoyments and in the third he may die. When 
Saturn passes the 8th house the native will suffer not a little 
mentally, physically and financially. These two transits only will 
be awfully felt by an individual irrespective of the Dhasa-bhukti- 
period. 


With regard to Jupiter’s movement, the transits in the Ist, 
3rd, 8th and 10th will be acutely felt. Mars’s stay in the 1st 
and 4th will create fevers which will give anxieties. These events 
happen irrespective of the results of the Dhasa-bhukti periods. 
The other results according to Gochara will be only subservient 
to those arrived at by the Dhasa-bhukti calculations. 


CHAPTER XXXII 
ASHTAGAVARGA CALCULATIONS 


This branch of astrology known as ‘ Ashtagavarga’, where- 
in the benefic dots given by each planet and the Lagna are noted, 
facilitates the calculation of time of occurrence of future events. 
In this branch the seven principal planets and the Lagna only 
are considered. Before giving out predictions, we have to draw 
various maps for this purpose. At first draw eight charts, seven 
for the seven planets and one for the sum total of all these. 
The table of each planet is called ‘Binna Ashtagavarga’ and 
the table containing the total of all these is called ‘ Sarvashta- 
gavarga’. 


Every planet has got some benefic dots on account of the 
other six planets in addition to his.own and the lagna. These 
benefic dots alone are noted-on a piece of paper. The maxi- 
mum number of such dots given by the planet will be only eight. 
Hence the difference between 8°and’ the total number of benefic 
dots given by a planet will represent the malefic dots of such 
planet but these malefic dots are not noted in the charts. 

The benefic dots given by each planet are as under :— 


The Sun :— 

The Sun £29, 4,7, 8,9, 10544 8 
The Moon 3.56,-10; 11 4 
Mars 324 7,3,4, 28 8 
Mercury 3.5.6, 9-10 the 3 
Jupiter 56,9. 11 4 
Venus 62712 3 
Saturn 1.2, 4, 7,8, 9, 10, 1 8 
Lagna 3:4: 610,15, 12 6 

Total 48 


120 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


The Moon :— 
The Sun 336728. 10211 
The Moon £523,562 7100 14 
Mars 232 02 629-106 11 
Mercury 1 354 527. 81041 
Jupiter e248. 10 TT 
Venus 324.°5;-7;-9;- 10; F1 
Saturn 33 35 6, 11 
Lagna 3, 6, 10, 11 
Total 
Mars :— 
The Sun Baz, On LOS it 
The Moon 53,6244 
Mars ee 478. AO V1 
Mercury Bsns 10, 11 
Jupiter OD, 11, 12 
Venus GysrByetidh, 12 
Saturn 1,457, 8-9, -10;.11 
Lagna T3.26,-10.-11 
Total .. 
Mercury :— 
The Sun 5526,59 1 E12 : 
The Moon 25°46; 8210, 11 
Mars de 2s 859. 40; FI: 
Mercury 13555-69101 it? 
Jupiter 628,112 
Venus Tals 3,4, 25,-82 91 
Saturn be 2 Ae 8 Oe tO Tt 
Lagna L235 45262 S105 EL Sig 
Total . 


BPANWOAIADA 


bh 
\o 


| 


bee ANBRBRIAWYN 


a NmoRD DOAN 
| 2] 


ASHTAGAVARGA CALCULATIONS 


Jupiter :— 
The Sun 
The Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Saturn 

_ Lagna 


YNUMANNNYMN 


v 


v 
ve 


v 


. 
~ 


RAD 


v 


v 
ay 


Pests QDS Ree etree NO te 


v 


Venus :— 


The Sun 
The Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Saturn 
Lagna 


— 


v 


. 
oy 


. 
. 


v 
y 


v 
¥ 


mW ban WD Wb oO 
NAMM N 


v 
oy 


Pah 


Saturn :— 


The Sun 
The Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Saturn 
Lagna 


. 
. 


vy 
. 


APADLY 


. 
. 


mW OND WW be 


v 


DMN NW 


. 


The Gem ie dots given by all the 


7, 8, 92 10,411 
11 

8, 10, 11 

6, 9, 10, 11 
7 BO 4 
10, 11 


. 
~ 


PRANY 


~) 


rR SO Pend SO: 


. 


Total 


na 


avy 


9, 11, 12 
9; 11 
10, 11 


> 


ey 


ns 


WUE LIAO OV DH VW 
eo 


9, 10, 11 
58, 9 11 


> 


Total 


4, 7, 8, 10, 11 
11 

6 10-2 
9, 10, 11 
iL 

11 12 

6, 11 

4, 6, 10, 11 


2 


Total 


planets amount to 337. 


6, -1;-9; A012; 


4,5; 8 OFT As 


5. 8; 971020 F 


121 


\o NDHNPRPUNDYHA] 
| S| 


122 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


The method of preparing Ashtagavarga table is to draw a 
zodiacal chart on a rough sheet of paper. Then mark the dots 
on the respective houses according to the number of benefic dots 
given in the above table, counting from the house occupied by 
the respective planet at the time of birth. Thus in the case of the 
dots given on account of the Sun, the dots have to be counted 
from the place occupied by the Sun at the time of birth. After 
marking all the dots in this wise in an Ashtagavarga of a planet, 
total the dots and note in a lump figure, which will represent the 
total number of benefic dots given by all the planets on account 
of the Ashtagavarga planet. For example, we shall take the fol- 
lowing horoscope and prepare the Ashtagavarga table for the 
Sun : 


ee ensnsosussneseresseses 

| » Saturn 

| Venus 

| Mercury 

Se Bag gece Ie 

Kethu 
Sun 


Jupiter 








Rahu Lagna 





| Moon 


In preparing the Ashtagavarga table of the Sun, draw at first 
a blank map. Then note the benefic dots of the Sun as given in 
the Sun’s Ashtagavarga table. For the Sun, we have to count the 
numbers from Kataka, where he occupies. The numbers to be 
counted therefore are 1, 2, 4,7, 8,9, 10 and 11. After noting all 
these dots we may have to mark on the same map the benefic dots 
of the Moon. For this purpose we have to count from the Moon 
who is in Kanni. The benefic dots of the Moon in the Sun’s 
Ashtagavarga are 3, 6, 10 and 11. Similarly, the benefic dots of 
the other planets and the Lagna will have to be noted on the same 


ASHTAGAVARGA CALCULATIONS 123 


map. Then sum up the dots and note them in a lump figure ffi 
the respective houses. The result will be thus :— 





Sun 
Sun Sun. (3) Mar. 
Mar. (4) Mer. Mer, 
he Sat. Ven. 
ae Lag. 





Sun 
Moon 
Mar. (5) 
Mer. 

Sat. 





Sun 
Mar. 
Jup. (3) 
Sat. 

Lag. 








Mar. 
Ven. (3) bi 
Sat. 











Note.—It is sufficient to ‘note the total figure alone in the 
Ashtagavarga Table for the Sun and it is not necessary to note 
the names of the planets giving the dots. 


On similar lines, the Ashtagavarga Tables for the other six 
planets should be prepared. In addition to the seven tables, we 
have to prepare a consolidated table, wherein the total points 
obtained for each sign from the seven tables should be noted. 
This table is called ‘Sarvashtagavarga’. The benefic dots 
obtained as above are called ‘Suddha Bindhus’. They are 
subject to two reductions known as Tricona Reduction and 
Ekadhipathya Reduction. The dots obtained after these two 
reductions are called ‘ Srothriya Bindhus ’. 


Tricona or Triangular Reductions. 


The dots in each group of the triangular signs (1, 5, & 9) 
are reduced thus :— 


124 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


* (1) If the benefic dots in the triangular signs are different, 
deduct the least dot from each of the three figures and put the 
balance in the signs. 


(2) If there is no point in any of these three signs, no 
reduction need be made. 


(3) If there are no points in any two of the three signs, 
the figure in the third also should be removed. 


(4) If the dots in the three signs are equal, the figures in 
the three signs should be removed. 


Illustration :—For the horoscope mentioned in this chapter 
the Ashtagavarga table for the Sun after the first reduction is 
as below : 





ee SO 


4/3|5| 4 


5 


Sun’s Ashta- |= - 


Z 
gavarga A we 
3{6|3]/1| |ol2z[olo 





1 





iT 
After Reduc- 
tion No. | 1 


o1| O11; & 











First take Aries and its triangular signs, Leo and Sagittarius. 
The figures are 3, 4, and 3. Applying Rule 1, we have to deduct 
3 from 4 which yields 1. Put this in Leo and zero in Aries and 
Sagittarius. Then take Taurus and its triangular signs, Virgo 
and Capricorn. The figures in these signs are 5, 1, and 5. 
Deducting 1 from 5 as per Rule 1, Taurus gets 4; Virgo 0 and 
Capricorn 4. Then comes Gemini and its triangular signs, Libra 
and Aquarius. The points in these signs are 4, 3, and 5. Apply- 
ing Rule 1, the Ashtagavarga of the Sun after the first reduction 
is 1, 0, 2. Put these figures in the respective signs. Next comes 
Cancer and its triangular signs, Scorpio and Piscus, the points 
in which are 5, 6, 4. Applying Rule 1, the dots to be noted in 
these three signs are 1, 2 and 0. Now all the signs being filled 


ASHTAGAVARGA CALCULATIONS 125 


up, the first reduction becomes complete. After this reduction, 
Ekadhipathya Reduction should be made. 


Ekadhipathya Reduction. 


This reduction should be made with reference to the plane- 
tary occupations in the Birth Chart after Reduction No. 1, is 
made. For this purpose, the dots in the two houses of each 
planet (excepting the Sun and the Moon) are taken up for 
consideration. 


The rules for making this reduction are as under: 


(1) If there are planets in both the houses of a planet, the 
figures of the Reduction No. 1 in those houses need not be 
disturbed. 


(2) When a planet or planets occupy only one or the two 
houses of a planet the following.rules should be applied : 


eS (a) If the figure in ‘the~ sign occupied by a planet is 
smaller than that. in.the unoccupied sign, make the 
latter figure equal to the former. 


(6) If the figure in the occupied sign is greater than that 
of the unoccupied sign, remove the latter. 


(c) If the figures in both the houses are equal, remove 
the figure in the latter. 


(3) When both the houses of a planet are not occupied 


(a) If the figures in the two houses are equal, remove 
both. 


(6) If the figures are unequal, reduce the larger figure 
to the smaller. 


(4) When there is no figure in any of the two houses, no 
reduction need be made. 


(5) For Cancer and Leo, Ekadhipathya Reduction does not 
apply, since the Sun and the Moon, who govern these signs own 


126 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


only one house each. The points obtained in the Reduction 
No. 1 should therefore be noted here also. 


Illustration. 


We shall take the horoscope noted in this chapter. 

















o|2/o]o 











In illustrating the Ekadhipathya Reduction, let us take the 
houses of Jupiter, viz., Pisceswand Sagittarius. As there is no 
figure in Pisces, no reduction need be made as per rule 4 and 
the zeros, as they are, should only be noted. Then let us consider 
the two houses of Mars, Aries.and Scorpio. As there is no point 
in one of the two houses, rule 4 applies and no reduction is 
therefore necessary. The next two signs for consideration are 
Taurus and Libra, the houses of Venus. As there is no point 
in Libra, Rule 4 applies. Then Gemini and Virgo, the houses 
of Mercury are to be considered. Here also Rule 4 applies. 
Let us then examine the houses of Saturn, viz., Aquarius and 
Capricorn. Rahu occupies Capricorn but he is not taken as a 
planet for the Ashtagavarga and hence we have to assume that 
there is no planet in the houses of Saturn. Doing so, Rule 3 
applies and since the figures in these signs are unequal, section (b) 
will apply. Accordingly, the larger figure, viz., 4 should be 
reduced to the smaller figure, viz., 2. For Cancer and Leo no 
reduction need be made as per Rule 5 and the same figures 
obtained from Reduction No. 1 should be noted here also. 


The total number of the reduced figures in the Ekadhipathya 
Reduction Table, viz., 13 in this case, has to be put in the 
middle of the chart and it will be useful in giving out predictions 


ASHTAGAVARGA CALCULATIONS 127 


according to this method. This figure is called ‘Srothriya 
Bindhu ’. 


Planetary Ashtagavargas. 


In the Ashtagavarga of the Sun, multiply the total of the 
figures after reductions (Srothriya bindhu) by the figure of the 
Ninth sign from the Sun in the Ashtagavarga before reductions. 
Divide the product by 27 and take the balance. Note the 
asterism counting the balance from Aswini in case the native is 
born in the Bright Half of the Lunar Month and from Sravishta 
in the case of a person born in the Dark Half. When Saturn 
passes through such asterism or its triangular asterisms, either 
his father or his paternal uncle dies or at least gets troubles, 
provided the Dhasabhukti is also bad. As an illustration, let us 
consider the horoscope mentioned under this chapter. The Sun 
is in Cancer and the 9th place is Pisces. The dot in this sign 
before reductions is 4 and therSrothriya Bindhu is 13. The 
multiplied figure is 52, which’ when divided by 27 yields a 
balance of 25. Counting this-fromyAswini, the resultant asterism 
is Purvapadrapadha. When..Saturn. transits this asterism or its 
triangular asterisms of Punarvasya°‘and Visaka, there will be 
danger to father. 


In the Ashtagavarga of the Moon, the dot in the 4th from 
the Moon should be multiplied by the Srothriya Bindhu and 
divided by 27. The balance will show the asterism which if 
transitted by Saturn there will be danger to mother, 


Similarly, the third place from Mars in his ashtagavarga 
should be taken into consideration for finding out the time of 
death of the native’s brother. The dots in the third place from 
Mars before reductions will show the number of brothers. 


In the Ashtagavarga of Mercury, the figure in the 4th from 
Mercury should be taken into consideration for the determination 
of the loss of friends, uncle and education. Jupiter’s transits on 
the signs arrived at will favour education and new acquaintances. 


In the Ashtagavarga of Jupiter, the figure in the 5th se 
Jupiter should be considered to find out the asterisms. Saturn’s 


s 


128 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


transit will cause danger to sons or daughters while Jupiter’s 
transits will favour birth of sons and daughters. The dots in the 
5th house from Jupiter or the Ascendant (whichever is stronger) 
will show the number of children. 


In the Ashtagavarga of Venus, the 7th house from Venus 
should be taken into account for the determination of the time 
of danger to wife or the time of marriage. Jupiter’s transit will 
favour marriage. 


In the Ashtagavarga of Saturn, the 8th house from Saturn 
should be considered for the determination of the death of the 
native. 


Sarvashtagavarga. 


Sarvashtaga is a consolidated table showing the total figures 
of the Seven Ashtagavargas for each of the twelve signs. For 
example, the dots in Mesha ins the seven Ashtagavargas before 
reduction will be summed up-and put in the sign Mesha in the ' 
Sarvashtaga Table, then the figures of Vrishaba will be summed 
up and noted in the sign Vrishaba Of the Sarvashtagavarga Table, 
and so on. 


If there are more than 30 points in any house of the Sarvash- 
tagavarga table that house is said to be a beneficial one and 
the planets when passing through this sign produce beneficial 
results. If the figure is between 25 and 30 the effect will be 
neither good nor bad but if it is below 25 the results will be bad. 


The sign which has the largest figure is generally auspicious 
to the native and all good works should be commenced having 
this sign as Lagna. 


A person will be happy if the figure in the 11th is greater 
than that in the 10th, while that in the 12th is less than that of 
the 11th, and while that in the Lagna is greater than that in the 
12th. The idea underlying this is that the Eleventh House repre- 
sents gains, Tenth House labour and Twelfth House expenditure 
and if a native gains much, spending little and labouring less he 
will naturally be happy. 


ASHTAGAVARGA CALCULATIONS 129 


The twelve signs of the Sarvashtagavarga may be divided 
into three parts of four signs each commencing from Pisces as 
follows : 


I Part—Pisces, Aries, Taurus and Gemini representing 
the first part of the native’s life, 


‘Tl Part—Cancer, Leo, Virgo and Libra representing the 
middle part of the life, and 


III Part—Sorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn and Aquarius . 
representing the last part of his life. 


Add together the figure of the four signs in each part. If the 
figures of the first part is largest, the first part of a person’s life 
will be prosperous ; if the second part is so, the middle part of © 
his life will be so; and if the third part is so, the last part of 
his life will be so. 


CHAPTER XXXII 
HORARY ASTROLOGY 


In the previous chapters we dealt with the nativity of an 
individual as pertaining to his general life. But apart from the 
general life of a person there are many other things which one 
may be very anxious to know about and these may not however 
be deduced from an horoscope as they may be of very minute 
or trivial nature. Resort may have consequently to be made to 
another system of astrology known as ‘Horary Astrology’ or 
Prasnas. There are different methods of arriving at the result 
of which the most important methods are Planetary Aroodas, 
Panchapakshi Shastra, Numerology, Hora Shastra and a simple 
Planetary Arooda. In this book ;the last two items which are 
more popularly followed are considered. 


Before launching upon’ the’ subject of Planetary Arooda or 
Hora Shastra, one has to know the suitable time when queries 
have to be asked and answered. The principle involved in 
Prasnas is, that the time when an enquirer gives out his mind, 
has influence of planets which affect the Five elements which are 
in the atmosphere, which in turn affect the mind. Hence the 
time and mind are the principal factors in Prasnas. If the 
enquirer is not of steady mind or if he thinks of some impossible 
things and gives out a number to test the astrologer, the results 
will not be satisfactory, as this number does not emerge from the 
heart. Therefore, an astrologer must bear in mind that the 
Prasnas are answered to a sincere enquirer. It is not advisable 
to answer Prasnas at dusk or while on roads or in offices when 
the minds are distracted. The enquirer should go to the house 
of an astrologer with the set purpose of enquiring him on some 
important point ; and the number emanating from the lips of the 
enquirer on this occasion will have much force. The success of 
Horary Astrology is dependent more on sincerity and faith ; and 


HORARY ASTROLOGY ; 131 


a good deal of caution is therefore necessary in giving out the 
results according to this branch of astrology. 


Planetary Arooda 


If a person is desirous of knowing whether there would be 
success or not in an undertaking or any other thing, he should 
be asked to give out a number within 108. Dividing that number 
by 12, the balance will represent the Rising Sign counted 
from Aries. Having this Rising Sign as the basis, the planetary 
positions of the day are studied. Beneficial results are given if 
the Rising Sun has beneficial influence and unfavourable results 
are given if it has a malefic influence. The Lagna should be 
powerful since everything is dependent on the sign which rises 
at the time of query. If it is not powerful or if the lord of Lagna 
occupies a Nasasthana, unsatisfactory result may have to be 
predicted. The strength of planets on account of Accidental and 
Essential Dignities will have to bedetermined at first before 
pronouncing judgment. If thelord of lagna occupies an inimical 
sign or is aspected by an inimical planet, we can say that there 
is influence of an enemy in’the matter.’ If such a lord occupies 
at the same time a trine or a quadrant we can say that there will 
be success. A careful study of the House relating to the parti- 
cular event about which the enquirer is anxious to know is also 
necessary. The benefic aspects and conjunctions in that House 
will do favour. The lord of that house should also be strong. 
The influence of the House will be only subservient to the Rising 
Sign, which governs the mind and state at the time of query. 
Besides the sign arrived at from Number, the sign rising at the 
time of query may also be found out and the influence on this 
Rising Sign may also be studied. The position of the Moon at 
the time of query will also exert some influence on the event, 
Hence, the student should study the influence of the Lagna rising 
at the time of query, Arooda Lagna and the Moon, before pro- 
nouncing judgment. d 


Some astrologers, instead of asking a number, resort to 
picking up some tiny conch-shells at random out of 108 such 


132 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


shells kept by them, dividing them into groups of twelve and 
finding out the Lagna from the balance. 


Hora Shastra 


: Hora which means hour is the term used to denote each oi 
the hours of a day. The first hour of the day is governed by the 
lord of the day ; the second by the planet sixth in order from 
the lord of the first hour ; the third by the planet sixth in order 
from the lord of the second, and so on. 


Malefic horas rising at the time of query will show that the 
enquirer will have failures and obstruction. Sun’s hora will 
indicate that there will be some danger; Venus will favour 
marriage, love, sports and recreation, vehicles and pleasures in 
general ; Mercury favours child-birth, approach of friends and 
relatives, literary pursuits, short journeys and short-term loans ; 
the Moon favours health, short journeys, domestic affairs and 
trade in fluids ; Saturn indicates: impediments and delays ; Jupite1 
indicates monetary gains, birth of a child, association with a 
superior or a preceptor and success in charitable pursuits ; and 
Mars indicates troubles from enemies, quarrels and misunder- 
standings. 


If the Day Planet and the Hour Planet are friends, success 
in the undertakings may be predicted, but if they are enemies 
unfavourable results and delays may have to be predicted. It is 
also advisable to find out who the Moment Planet is and ascertain 
his strength and relationship with the Day and Hour, planets. 
Each hour is divided into fifteen moments of 4 minutes each and 
the lord of the first moment will be the lord of the hour that of 
the second moment will be the lord of the subsequent hour and 
so on. The Moment Planet ruling at the time of query may 
exert more influence on the event than the Hour Planet and the 
Day planet. For this purpose, the exact local time may have 
to be ascertained and the first hour will commence from the 
exact time of sun-rise in the locality. 


The following chart will be useful— 


PLANETARY HORAS 











DAY 

eee ees 
Day 6-7 7-8 8-9 9-10 10-11. 11-12 = 12-1 1-2 2-3 3-4 4-5 5-6 
Sun Ss Vv My M St J Ms Ss Vv My M St 
Mon M St J Ms S Vv My M St J Ms Ss 
Tues Ms Ss Vv My M Ss J Ms S Vv My M 
Wed My M St J Ms St Vv My M St J Ms 
Thurs J Ms S Vv My M St J Ms Ss Vv My 
Fri Vv My M St J Ms S Vv My M St J 

Sat St J Ms Ss Vv My M St J Ms Ss Vv 

NIGHT 

arene trtenmammmamtines sain ttaantin teen nt —rverrenenneeeitetane ernne taennertnne nent NN ARRNY 
Day 6-7 7-8 8-9 9-10 10-11 11-12) 12-1 1-2 2-3 3-4 4-5 5-6 
Sun : J Ms. §S Vv My M St J Ms s Vv My 

Mon v My M St Ms S Vv My M St J 

Tues St Je ay MS 8 Vv My M St J Ms S Vv 

Wed ' 5 Vv My M St J Ms Ss Vv My M St 
Thurs M St J Ms S Vv M M St J Ms Ss 

Fri Ms Ss Vv M M St J Ms S Vv My M 

Sat My M St. J Ms S Vv My: M St J Ms 


ADOTOULSY AUVUOH 


€cl 


CHAPTER XXXIV 


GLOSSARY 


Accidental Dignities :—The places occupied by the planets 
from the Lagna are called the accidental dignities ; and the most 
powerful of the accidental dignities are trines, quadrants for the 
benefics and the Upachayas for the malefics. Nasasthanas are 
evil dignities. 

Adipathya :—Ownership of the houses of the zodiac by the 
planets. If a planet’s house is trine or quadrant to the Ascendant, 
the planet will be said to have a good Adipathya, but if it is a 
lord of Nasasthanas then such a planet is said to have a bad 
adipathya. 


Affliction :—If a planet is in depression, Nasasthana or 
having malefic aspects or conjunctions, it will be said to be 
afflicted. 


Airy Signs :—Mithuna,Thula’‘and Kumbha are said to be 
Airy Signs. They are also called Mental Signs. A person born 
in any of these signs will have a strong and powerful mind. 


Amsas :—Divisions of a sign. If the division is into two 
equal parts, it is called Horai; if it is into three, it is called 
Drekkana ; if it is into seven, it is called Sapthamamsa ; if it is 
into nine, Navamsa ; if it is into twelve, Dwadasamsa ; if it is 
into thirty, Thrimsamsa ; and if it is into sixty, Shastiamsa. 

Amsathipathi :—The lord of a sign in the Amsa Chart. 


Angles :—The 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th houses are said to be 
angles. Planets in this position are powerful and they usually 
give beneficial results. 


Animal Signs :—See Common Signs. 
Anthara :—A sub-division of a bhukti. 
Apoklima :—Same as Cadent, 


GLOSSARY 135 


Applying :—A planet will be said to be applying when it 
moves to the direction of another planet. 


Ascendant :—The rising sign in which an individual is 
born. It is also called Janma Lagna. 


Aspects :—The influences which a planet is capable of 
exerting on another house from the house occupied by him. 
Every planet will exert such influence on the Seventh House from 
* the House occupied by him. Besides the aspect on the seventh 
house, Saturn has special aspects on the 3rd and 10th houses, 
Mars on the 4th and 8th houses, Dragons on the 3rd, 6th and 
11th houses, and Jupiter on the Sth and 9th houses. Of these 
special aspects, the aspects of 8 and 4 have only three-fourth 
. strength ; 5 and 9 have half the strength ; 3 and 10, one-fourth 
strength; and 6 and 11, one-eighth strength. The signs also 
aspect each other. and reference may be made to Chapter I of 
Part I for these aspects. 


Ashtagavarga :—It is a table.of eight groups. This is a 
separate treatise on the nativity.of an individual. 
Asthangatha :—See Combustion. 
Athipathi :—A lord. 
- Badhaka Sthanas :—11th house for a Movable sign, 9th 
house for a Fixed sign and 7th house for a Common sign. 


Barren Signs :—Mithuna, Vrischika and Kanni are said to 
be barren. These are considered principally for determining the 
birth of off-spring. If the Fifth House falls in any of these signs 
there will be no off-spring. 


Beeda Rasis :—1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 12th places: 


Benefics :—Jupiter, Venus and Waxing Moon. . Mercury is 
only a partial benefic and if he joins a benefic he also becomes 
a benefic but if he joins a malefic he becomes a malefic. Certain 
persons are of opinion that Jupiter and the Full Moon are full 
benefics ; Venus, 3/4th benefic; Mercury, half ; the Sun and 
Mars, one-fourth ; and Saturn, Dragons and Jupiter having the 
association with the other two, are malefics. There are still some 
others who consider that these benefics will become malefics for 
those born in the dark half of the Lunar Month. 


136 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Bhava :—See House. 

Bhukti :—A sub-period of a dhasa. 

Bi-corporeal Signs :—Mithuna, Dhanus and Meena are 
called bi-corporeal signs or double-bodied signs. 

Cadent :—Third, Sixth, Ninth and Twelfth Houses are called 
cadents. They are supposed to be evil houses. But the Third 
House is good for a malefic and Ninth House for all. 

Cardinal Signs :—Mesha, Kataka, Thula and Makara are 
Cardinal, Movable or Mineral signs. If there are many planets 
in these signs the native will be prosperous and famous. 

Chesta bala :—Strength of a planet on account of its 
motion. 

Combustion :—If any planet is within 84 degrees of the Sun 
it is said to be combustion. This position is usually considered 
as an evil one. It is also called as an Eclipse or Asthangatha. 

Cona or Kona :—Same as: ttine. 


Conjunction :—A planét within say 8 degrees of another 
planet. In Hindu Astrology; we usually take a planet to be in 
conjunction with another planet if both of them occupy the same 
sign. The influence of conjunction will however be acute when 
they are within 8 degrees. 


Debilitation :—Same as Depression or Fall. 


Depression :—The seventh house from the exaltation sign 
of a planet is called depression, debilitation or fall. The planet 
in depression is very weak and does not produce good results. 


Dhasa :—The name given to a period of years, which a 
planet is said to govern. 


Dhusthanas :—Same as Nasasthanas. 
Direct :—The forward movement of a planet or an asterism. 
Double-bodied Signs :—Same as Bi-corporeal signs. 


Dik bala :—Strength of a planet on account of the quarter 
or direction occupied by him. z 


Drig bala :—Strength of a planet on account “of aspects, 


GLOSSARY 137 


Earthy Signs :—Vrishaba, Kanni and Makara. 

Eclipse :—Same as Combustion or Asthangatha. 

Elevation :—The planet which is nearest to the Mid-heaven 
is said to be elevated above others. 


"Essential Dignities :—The position of a planet in the zodiac 
like Exaltation, Own-house, or Depression. 

Equinoctial signs :—Mesha and Thula. 

Exaltation :—The Sun in Mesha, the Moon in Vrishaba, 
Jupiter in Kataka, Mercury in Kanni, Saturn in Thula, Mars in 
Makara and Venus in Meena are said to be exalted. The planet 
in exaltation will produce very good results. 

Fall :—Same as Depression or Debilitation. 

Feminine signs :—The even signs, viz., Vrishaba, Kataka, 
Kanni, Vrischika, Makara and Meena are feminine. 

Feminine Pianets :—The,Moon and Venus. 

Fiery Signs :—Mesha, Simha and Dhanus. 

Fixed Signs :—Vrishaba, Simha, Vrischika and Kumbha 
are called Fixed or Vegetable: signs. 

Fruitful Signs :—Kataka, Vrischika and Meena. If the 
cusp of the Fifth house falls on any of these signs there will be 
off-spring. a 

Ghatika :—A measure of time equivalent to 24 minutes. 

Gochara :—The method of calculating future events on the 
basis of the planetary transits having the Moon’s Rasi at birth 
as the First House. 

Houses :—There are two kinds of houses, viz., planetary 
and mundane. The planetary houses are those which fall on 
the signs of the zodiac that are owned by these planets, and the 
mundane houses are those which are thirty degrees each starting 
from the Rising Sign, like First House, Second House etc., which 
tule the events of life. : 


Kala bala :—Strength of time. 
Kendra :—Same as quadrant. 
Kendra-conas :—Kendra signs and Tricona signs. 


138 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY 


Lagna :—A general name for the sign rising in the East 
every day owing to the rotation of the Earth. The twelve signs 
of the Zodiac will rise in the East every day one by one. In 
_ Astrology, the word ‘ The Lagna’ is used to signify the Ascendant 
or the Rising Sign of the native. 

Lights :—The Sun and the Moon. 

Luminaries :—Same as Lights. 

Lord :—The planet owning a house or governing an event 
of life. 

Malefics :—The Sun, Mars, Saturn and the Dragons. The 
Sun and Mars are said to be 3/4th malefics in nature, while the 
rest are full malefics. If Jupiter conjoins a full malefic he also 
becomes a malefic. Similarly, if Mercury conjoins a malefic he 
also becomes a malefic. Some are of opinion that for those 
born during the Dark Half of the Lunar Month, these malefics 
become benefics. 

Marakathipathi :—The) planet) owning a Marakasthana. 

Marakasthana :—The second, third, seventh and eleventh 
houses are called Marakasthana. “These houses denote accidents 
to the native. 

Masculine planets :—The Sun, Mars and Jupiter. 

Masculine signs :—The odd signs, viz., Mesha, Mithuna, 
Kataka, Thula, Dhanus and Kumbha are called masculine signs. 

Mineral Signs :—See Cardinal signs. 

Movable Signs :—Same as Cardinal signs. 

Moolatricona :—This is one of the good Essential Dignities 
of the planets. The Sun in Simha, the Moon in Vrishaba, Mars 
in Mesha, Mercury in Kanni, Jupiter in Dhanus, Venus in Thula 
and Saturn in Kumbha are said to be in their Moolatricona rasis. 

Nasasthanas :—Sixth, Eighth and Twelfth Houses. These 
are considered to be very bad accidental dignities of the pores 

Naisargika bala :—Natural strength. 

Native :—The person for whom the planetary influences are 
considered. 


Northern signs :—The six signs from Mesha to Kanni. 





GLOSSARY 139 


Occidental :—Western. A planet occupying a house between 
10th and 4th via 7th, 

Oriental :—Eastern. A planet remaining in any house 
between 4th and 10th via Lagna. 

Pada :—A stellar quarter. 

Panapara :—Same as Succeedent. 

Planetary War :—If two or more planets remain in the 
same sign there will be a war among them and the strongest of 
them will be the victor. 


ADDENDA 


Page 51 Line 27, after ‘Moon’ add ‘or Lagna,’ 
Page 103 After 19th line add 
Venus: Tho native will be wealthy, educated eS 
and influential.;He will havea nice circle ore 
joyous friends. “He will have the comforts of a 
decent honse,conveyance and furniture. Venus 
in Cardinal or common signs causes !ong foreign 
travels. 
Page 105 After 19th line add 
Venus: The native will have a good wealth 
but will spend more on pleasurable items; will 
have nice beds and enjoyments in the company 
of opposite sex; a bit given to laziness; and he | 
may become plumpy in latter part of life, 
Venus in Saturn’s house reduces the results col 
siderably in a defective manner). 






















z Neuihern signs 7 —The st : 
there are many planets in these signs the native ll prosper more 
in the southern latitudes. 


| 





GLOSSARY 139 


Occidental :—Western. A planet occupying a house between 
10th and 4th via 7th. 


Oriental :—Eastern. A planet remaining in any house 
between 4th and 10th via Lagna. 

Pada :—A stellar quarter. 

Panapara :—Same as Succeedent. 

Planetary War :—If two or more planets remain in the 


same sign there will be a war among them and the strongest of 
them will be the victor. 


Prishtodaya :—Rising backwards. 

Quadrant :—Same as Kendra. The first, fourth, seventh 
and tenth places are called Kendras. 

Rasi :—Same as sign. The sign occupied by the Moon at 
the time of birth is usually termed as ‘The Rasi’. 

Retrograde :—A planet having a backward motion is said 
to be retrograde. The Sun andthe Moon have no retrograde 
motion. Rahu and Kethu haveygot always the backward motion. 

Sarvashtagavarga :—A Consolidated table of the seven 
ashtagavargas. 

Set :—It is a place from the Lagna where a planet will have 
no strength. It has been explained in Part I and reference may 
be made to it. 

Sign :—It is an influencing body and there are twelve signs 
in the Zodiac. It is also called a Rasi. 

Significator :—The planet or a house that signifies an event 
like the Sun, the significator of father and so on. 

Signs of long ascension :—The six signs from Kataka to 
Dhanus. 

Signs of short ascension :—The six signs from Makara to 
Mithuna. 

Sirodaya :—Rising by head. 

Siroprishtodaya :—Rising forwards and backwards. 

Southern signs :—The six signs from Thula to Meena. If 
there are many planets in these signs the native will prosper more 


' in the southern latitudes. 


140 FUNDAMENTALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY a 


Sphuta :—Calculation of the degrees occupied by the g 
planets. 


Srothriya Bindhus :—The benefic dots obtained after the 
Tricona and Ekadhipathya reductions in the Ashtagavarga. 


Succeedent Houses :—2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th houses. 


Suddha Bindhus :—The benefic dots in the Ashtagavarga 
before reductions. 


Thithi :—A day of the lunar month. 
Tricona :—Same as Cona or Trine. 


Trine :—1st, 5th and 9th houses which are considered to 
be very good places. 


Tropical Signs :—Kataka and Makara. The former is the 
Northern tropic while the latter is the Southern tropic. 


Upachayas :—3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th places. 


Vargottama :—If a planet occupies in the Navamsa chart 
the same sign as that occupied in the Rasi Diagram, it is said 
to be in a Vargottama. This_is considered to be good. 


Vegetable signs :—-Same .as..Fixed signs. 
Vighatika :—One-sixtieth part of a ghatika. 
Watery signs :—Same as Fruitful Signs. 





indica Gandhi National - 
for the Arts 




